possible. Kut'uzov himself with all his transport took the road to
that came upon him at Hollabr"unn, which was clearly impossible. But
therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count
Bagrati'on's exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and
covered this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to

the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store
had persisted in his request to Kut'uzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also
asked the prince's permission to ride round the position to see the
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff
"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you
Captain," and he turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who
you, all!" he added in a tone of command.
jest was unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.

entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.

officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in

which at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,
stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant

was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to him
his captain.
the way from Ulm, while D'olokhov maintained that the Russians had not


"The devil skin your Emperor."
S'idorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince

Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point the
position. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them to
come up. In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank
familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know
snacks."
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.

hurried off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.
ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto
From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, came
blood rush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
need to hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction

(He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a

and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the
was particularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery
freckled gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth. The short,
with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute
report, and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended
without support. Prince Bagrati'on turned to the officer and with his
the commander of the dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in
(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kut'uzov at Braunau) that
in accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that

supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and he
In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the
often heard. "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the
had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what had
sign that this was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning

half-closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words. The staff
and see the standard flapping against its staff.
reached Bagrati'on, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in
tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close
repeating to himself at each alternate step, "Left... left...
into step with a hop, looked back angrily, and through the ominous
fearing to relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.
turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,
front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the

gave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other side
and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagrati'on than his courage
serving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had been

command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and
suddenly replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
"You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure
as well as that the French were outflanking our left. The general
for the hussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from
conscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would cross
irresolution communicated itself to the men.
reins and started of his own accord.
elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
over the squadron. Rost'ov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at
before him but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There
and could not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?"
was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
family's, and his friends', and the enemy's intention to kill him
feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single sentiment, that
kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if


missed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at any
continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem
reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russian
nearly cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our
instructions to Major Ekon'omov, he could not help taking notice of the
Ekon'omov.
action did Prince Bagrati'on, still hearing the cannonade in the center,
each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated
All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in the
battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one
at them.
jump, T'ushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun,
embarrassing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably
thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the
his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded
"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standing
often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement.
cannon balls at the French with both hands.

stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay
"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an
T'ushin.
CHAPTER XXI
T'ushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one
cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to T'ushin and asked

The cadet was Rost'ov. With one hand he supported the other; he was

off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on the

humming infantry as by a frame.
"What did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came
fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, who

"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them

"He's dead-why carry him?" said another.
"Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here,"
officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with
perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at


broke up two squares, your excellency."
abandoned in the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for
Someone mentioned that Captain T'ushin was bivouacking close to the
and abruptly.
laughed loudest.
"You might have taken some from the covering troops."
fingers twitched nervously.
"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," he
"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said T'ushin.
impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged
with Tely'anin and Bogd'anich. That affair was the same thing as this
fluttering in that light. T'ushin had not returned, the doctor had not
added: "What a lot of men have been crippled today-frightful!"


or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
request.
above and below him in social standing. Something always drew him toward
even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended
had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent.
words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre
this bone-a bill for thirty thousand rubles-to the poor princess
no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He
Count Bez'ukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of
propose is the only thing possible."
the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies open before you."
and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet of
By "what was due from the Ryaz'an estate" Prince Vas'ili meant
attained.
his beautiful daughter H'el`ene.
was charmant. Even if Anna P'avlovna did not say so, he could see that
H'el`ene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation were
received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the
but Anna P'avlovna-who was in the excited condition of a commander on


P'avlovna again touched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't
meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just
passing it across H'el`ene's back. H'el`ene stooped forward to make
only covered by her garments. And having once seen this he could not
He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at the
once recognized it to be a tuft of grass. She was terribly close to him.

Vas'ili. "I know something about that. Don't I? And you are still so
When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of what
he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vas'ili is her
would be something unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in

Bolk'onski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that
Pierre who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that")
that he ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision,
Vas'ili, in the rare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's
girl," he sometimes said to himself "she never makes a mistake,
She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for him
He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter
and relations had been given to understand that the fate of the young
except to Pierre and H'el`ene, whose presence he seemed not to notice.
With a facetious smile on his face, he was telling the ladies about last

his handkerchief, and again: 'Serg'ey Kuzm'ich, From all sides,'...
Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where the
that the story about Serg'ey Kuzm'ich, the laughter, and the food
old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh
dominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.
He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and
shoulders close to his eyes.
begin, when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her
"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolk'onski," repeated
Prince Vas'ili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a
occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,
have stayed longer."
ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here
the large drawing room. Prince Vas'ili came up to Pierre with languid
Vas'ili had only acquired by imitating other parents.
something and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was
When Prince Vas'ili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his

face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shaking
wife... God bless you!..."
again.
"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but
with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted his
    * "I love you."

father, he feels for you."

temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vas'ili's visit, he was
before and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in the

frowning.
I'll teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and



that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear.
Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole
service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I
conservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and
"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the
bowed head.

of amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him.
round with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter
"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I
"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can never
chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess
more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty. She was so plain that
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, the
with a foretaste of artistic pleasure.
The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess
"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.
not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it."
knew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not to
being rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally different
before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her
fulfill Thy will?" And scarcely had she put that question than God
God, without Whose care not a hair of man's head can fall?
Bourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,
entered the room. Prince Vas'ili approached first, and she kissed the
speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all. Anatole was not
behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in
her white teeth. She met Prince Vas'ili with that playful manner often

"And our little tea table?"
his son and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run
had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered the
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and considering
with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without
intention of proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask
dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming
"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vas'ili in his usual
composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had
Prince Vas'ili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his


scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his

alone together, Prince Vas'ili announced his hopes and wishes to the old
from his son.
As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of time
magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a future
guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.
off; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew
Paris. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for a
Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a man
Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.
"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now,
then he did everything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle
well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. And
got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.

when she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. She
pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he
it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only for
be parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with this


much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an
water.



dowry and take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the


Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
he added that Prince Vas'ili was also there. When T'ikhon came to her
"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will
Prince Vas'ili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox


Prince Vas'ili rose.
"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have
them. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask my
CHAPTER VI
found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the same


of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her
"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"

Anna Mikh'aylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,

"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked
officer."



and, whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him
S'onya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, and


"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old P'etya,
"Come later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.

the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his
crying.
considered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she
warrior doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or
letter, he now was.
For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of
and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards


who had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.
and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his
Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice on
obtain a post on the commander in chief's staff. Berg and Bor'is,

"Dear me, how you have changed!"
kissed him three times.
and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Bor'is, pointing to his own
Been under fire already?" asked Bor'is.
rode with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and

Rost'ov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put both
letter from home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk

letter.
to Bagrati'on which the old countess at Anna Mikh'aylovna's advice had
for!"

"Why?"

Bor'is.
Galicia he had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter
Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and
think, Count? The next day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of
Sch"on Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle
worse, would have thought that Rost'ov was himself to blame since what
saber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he
hoping to find him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line
the contempt with which Rost'ov, from his fighting army point of view,
rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would be
whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing to

A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's
In a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and more
Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rost'ov think of what he ought to

the Russian with his heir the Tsar'evich, and the Austrian with the
or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of the
smooth-felt that no small matter was happening, but an important and
infantry.
They're coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final
repeated by others from various sides and all became silent.
joyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and the
himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,
seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,
Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with his

thought Rost'ov. "I should die of happiness!"

"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rost'ov, but then even
that surrounded the Emperors.
When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began
action, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.

They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against the

rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not
He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all these
it, next day, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olm"utz and,
gentlemen changed his position on seeing Bor'is. The one who was writing
erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his
At that moment Bor'is clearly realized what he had before surmised, that
Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand.
"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have
your disposal."
"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you,"
now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgor'ukov; I have to
with him to Dolgor'ukov.
by Bor'is arrived at the palace to find Dolgor'ukov. Everyone at
inspired by the Emperors' presence were eager for action. The
of the victory that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his
exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what
today for the Emperor." Dolgor'ukov smiled significantly.

"Only that?" said Bolk'onski.

And the talkative Dolgor'ukov, turning now to Bor'is, now to Prince
Dolgor'ukov to the Emperor.
as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here
evidently expecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew


struggle to conquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself
squadron. The day was bright and sunny after a sharp night frost, and
Den'isov, who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some
taken from the prisoner.
addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have been

make him go on.
amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought of
enveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm,
The Emperor drew level with Rost'ov and halted. Alexander's face was
once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left
represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the
different one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bending

at the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the

less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rost'ov.
baritone.
"Den'isov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rost'ov. "It is such a
eyes. He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian

At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with
Dolgor'ukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate
nineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till
eighty thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of
regular motion as a result of all that activity.
catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joins
of the hand on the dial of human history.
coming action from Dolgor'ukov. He felt that Kut'uzov was upset
"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be
"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as
"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call
me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all
"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgor'ukov said quickly, and getting up
to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan,
till then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and
a third, Count Arakch'eev, if his nerves were not too weak."
Kut'uzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied:
CHAPTER XII
and drowsy Kut'uzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman and
at Kut'uzov's.
Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander
Weyrother, hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on

impending battle, under a heading which he also read out:
while we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his
The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.
generals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether he
elbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so
hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed in
anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry out
his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheel
be they what they might.
"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," said
Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it was
arrangements to the minutest detail remain the same."
heard them, and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is
right-he did not know. "But was it really not possible for Kut'uzov
her and for himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he
concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the
for the next battle are planned by him alone. Nominally he is only an
what am I to do if I love nothing but fame and men's esteem? Death,

mist!"
in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the
riding, and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the
deceitful German, whom he would not only kill with pleasure but whom
saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It
sabretache..."-"Keep to the right, your honor, there are bushes
Den'isov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense. The chief thing
near him pricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the
The hussar did not reply.
dark... Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.


is nothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to
Rost'ov.
hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction
but when he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto
suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,
Only when approaching Bagrati'on did Rost'ov let his horse gallop again,
Bagrati'on. "Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything
"Your excellency," said Rost'ov, "may I ask a favor?"


Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:
exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no

but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,
were moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds
who remained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet
same sergeant major Iv'an M'itrich, the same company dog Jack, and the
The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they could
too.
the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of
alone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time before



"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got
ordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in
at first irregularly at varying intervals-trata...tat-and then more
the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknown
knew till after eight o'clock.
side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
and part were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack
the center of the Russian army, and that that center was already
self-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happily
a few minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidly
At eight o'clock Kut'uzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth
his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about he did not
concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there,"
a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a
behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was standing at the end of
enemy?"
"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the


Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kut'uzov
"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kut'uzov in the midst of
rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform with
This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy face
brighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two
started," thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with
of all these brilliant young men.
quite heard.

I do not begin, sire, because we are not on parade and not on the
for about a minute.
one of the 'Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilit'e,
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.
The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a
carabineers.
speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind
front of us.
thought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kut'uzov.
have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to
his lower jaw.
The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by
neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with the
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kut'uzov, were firing
the disordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
Several soldiers fell.
was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while
And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to
and fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle
lofty sky before? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All



message to Kut'uzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning
In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shots
visible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrow


width of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white
The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.
(Rost'ov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men
smoke enveloped everything.
"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall see
voice calling him by name.
Rost'ov stopped.
end spurred his horse.
uniformed Austrian officer.


Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.
and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.
he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where
Rost'ov had been ordered to look for Kut'uzov and the Emperor near the

horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to
the carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black horses

Rost'ov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now
go? That way is nearer."
manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded
riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots. The
sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle
he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian
to Rost'ov and involuntarily riveted his attention, made a gesture of
false. He was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even
inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic

"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rost'ov, and hardly
round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but
"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.

(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerous
so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully
splashing with blood those near them.
steps, and again stopped.
under him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It
from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought of
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the
On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his
either," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding
Majesty," said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was
him, or what was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing
Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in

Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian

"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward,"
"He's very young to come to meddle with us."
and, addressing him, again used the epithet "young man" that was
hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear,
alive could understand or explain.
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, but
would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to
all-important."
itself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that


bottles of wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the
"Den'isov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning forward

in our house, aren't they?"
houses from his door. It seemed to him the horses were not moving at
angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned, turned as loosely
young master. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prok'ofy, trembling with
"Is everything quite all right?"
hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same
changed!... Where are the candles?... Tea!..."
room, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.

Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made since
"You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissing and


cleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servants
"Why, is it late?"

The girls sprang aside. Den'isov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,
and went out. Nat'asha had put on one spurred boot and was just getting
to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.
you? I'm awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his

fire and pressed it there!"


charming that only a fool would renounce such happiness."
a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girl
"Well, and are you still true to Bor'is?" he continued.
"No."
on her toes any longer. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never
Nat'asha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell
"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible,
"Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."
you-S'onya. But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender

ladies and gentlemen than Rost'ov had ever expected to see him.
Nik'olenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite young
to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be
at the Arkh'arovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal
as the "angel incarnate."
I do not yet know. There will be time enough to think about love when I

The club cook and the steward listened to the count's orders with
The count considered.
Eh, Dm'itri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum
clinking of spurs were heard at the door, and the young count, handsome,
"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagrati'on worried himself less before
son.
his son by both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the
laughing. "Dear, dear!..."
now we shall get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him
Anna Mikh'aylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depicted


been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories
Moscovites who took their opinions from others-Ily'a Rost'ov among
defective commissariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebysz'ewski and of
Moscow's hero was the fact that he had no connections in the city
calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr.
our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another

stood at every door anxiously noting visitors' every movement in order
respect and honor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs
By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealth
Petersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.

"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together
ballroom.
festive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virile
met him at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such a
of the club, beset the new arrivals. Count Ily'a, again thrusting his
held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with it) and drew his
   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,
more important nearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows
Nesv'itski. Count Ily'a Rost'ov with the other members of the committee
began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish,
shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted
last campaign, Prince Peter Iv'anovich Bagrati'on!" and again his blue
As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed

nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear
disbelieved both the princess' hints and the letter, but he feared
companion, D'olokhov had come straight to his house, and Pierre had put
pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true,
him," he thought, and again he felt something terrible and monstrous
Rost'ov and had not responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's

Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talking
Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking at

"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.
He hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Den'isov's
"And do you feel quite calm?" Rost'ov asked.
me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you see one your
He had evidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and
just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a
grave, moment I did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no
more honorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become
did not wish to confess.
covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during the

men's will.
right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. D'olokhov
hand with it and knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and
toward him and said something.

and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still
D'olokhov and looked sorrowfully at him. Den'isov, Rost'ov, and
"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.
totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on
"Who?" asked Rost'ov.
learned that D'olokhov the brawler, D'olokhov the bully, lived in Moscow
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in
their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look on
"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without
study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his head
I was to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that
him do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if
promener," * she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with
perhaps dying, while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"
nonsense," he thought. "The slur on my name and honor-that's all
alive-live: tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago.
for the tenth time, Moli`ere's words: "Mais que diable allait-il
intention to part from her forever.

who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her

plainness of speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other
not moving a muscle.
would not have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so,"

H'el`ene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His
for Petersburg alone.
letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had
defeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz
battle, a list of whom has been sent me under flag of truce."
"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,
incomprehensible-the death of one she loved.
The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but on
"Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his face

Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at something
Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of her

expression and went out again without saying a word. She looked at
"So there's nothing?"
sent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a

of the general sorrow.

inevitable pain showed itself.
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump
"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said the
large leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. On
did not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old

tried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from the
T'ikhon to ask Mary Bogd'anovna what news.-"Say only that 'the

It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume its
kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.
Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of the
"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!" she
a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On

stairs and embraced his sister.

downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew entered
"God is merciful...."
The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,
through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried to

bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out and
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed
Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went

faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaited

son.
It's true he has been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that?
people do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"
care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of
"Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rost'ov, who was under his
amusing, now girlishly enchanting.
readiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.
your Den'isov though he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so
do you know he has fallen in love with S'onya?"
have dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time D'olokhov
It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistible
Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders were
from home, at dinners, parties, and balls.
were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty people
visiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,

"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the
"There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was further
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From

I know for certain that you won't marry her."
look. Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first


"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother and

pretty young Princesses Gorchak'ov met suitors there and were married
Nat'asha, who was exceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the pas


"And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause.
ladies-" He turned with the same request to Den'isov who was also a
refuse Iogel and asked S'onya to dance. Den'isov sat down by the old
who was passing:
When it came to Nat'asha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,
"Now then, V'aska," said Nicholas.
Den'isov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow
he meant to do, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly


of, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell supper
would meet.

guessing Rost'ov's thought.

side and at first did not play. D'olokhov kept glancing at him.


waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual
on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in
word of honor not to take anything more till the spring. Now only twelve
clearness, and charm that it seemed as if it were all a lost and
"So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated D'olokhov, and as
with a smile.

which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguely
that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from
over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand
either," he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I
and still the same and in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it
D'olokhov, slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside and began
"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it
right! Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one
moment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists,
jest.
unlucky at cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."
him.

At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after returning
sat playing patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house.
   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?
the old lady.
"No, Papa is not back yet," said S'onya.
"All wight! All wight!" shouted Den'isov. "It's no good making


away? But where to? It's one-let them sing!"
it, she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from
Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet
Nat'asha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose,
painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet sing
it.
nonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Nat'asha, now then, dearest!
and yet be happy...."
reality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word and went
condition.
"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "I
"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.
everyone!
expected this.
"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."
"Don't, Nat'asha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a joke.

"Well then, tell him so."
out accidently."
say it."

Den'isov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not
"Countess..." said Den'isov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face.
kissing her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, without
After Den'isov's departure, Rost'ov spent another fortnight in Moscow,
sent D'olokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his

feet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
station, but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a
Sok'olniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless
have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wanted
considered him a criminal, and a year later they executed those who
The Torzh'ok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering her


man, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite
stern, shrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. He
preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything was

to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and
CHAPTER II
happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune."-"I regret it very
of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctant

acquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's
"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the
of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I
with the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from our
millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poor
not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in
came thy conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being?
looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves
and unreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of a
his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wise

The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
worldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into

purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir.
woman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the way
idle, vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.
"No, tell them to harness."
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is
Petersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook
and Martinists, even in Nov'ikov's time. For a long while after he had

realized as he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him,
"I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he


Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as
something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small
Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.
wishing to take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent
off his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in black darkness,
unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospel-it

enlightenment?"
acquaintance-he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.

of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. "I

had happened. He could not yet make out what had happened, when the
gasping before him, bending her head back and gazing at him with her

from the race course, not knowing where he was going. He felt utterly
Chapter 26
of their conversation after the party at Princess Tverskaya's he had
man who, after vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a
man!" was the greeting with which he met him.
no answer, but he would have been greatly angered with any man who
declined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna's, and
he did not think about it; but all the same though he never admitted it
of putting an end to the position that he would not recognize it at
Alexandrovitch; but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning,
about his wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard to
began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews,
doctor, a celebrated Petersburg doctor, who was an intimate
"I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess," replied the doctor.
abstaining from breathing. Then he withdrew, leaving in Alexey

And with his close assiduity, his conscientious devotion to his work,
celebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the
then he still had to drive round to call on a certain great personage

side of it. "How unlucky! Can he be going to stay the night?" she
staying the night, I hope?" was the first word the spirit of falsehood

She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. She was

All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in
bewildered eyes with which Seryozha glanced first at his father and
to him whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father.
him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.
"No, I don't ... yes, I do," she said, not looking at him, and
high boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.
she no longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that his
her existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of
his soul," she thought; "as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,

noted for his intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered
gazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and
if he were to kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all he wants is
name, would force themselves on his attention. And it was as natural

are taking part in the race are military men, who have chosen that
"If I'd been a Roman woman I should never have missed a single circus."

unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, I
"Done!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned
"But here's this lady too, and others very much moved as well; it's
had cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown
slight frown turned away again.

the next turned to Betsy.
"Let us go, if you like," he said in French, but Anna was listening to
at that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to the
She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face
On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take her
"I'll send to him and find out, and let you know," Betsy whispered to

"What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles,"

"Mind," he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.
before her.
killed. Was it of him they were speaking when they said the rider was
it's absurd."

solemn rigidity of the dead, and his expression did not change during
Petersburg. Immediately afterwards a footman came from Princess Betsy
memories of their last meeting set her blood in flame.
betaken themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered
immediately crystallized into a definite place marked out for them.
for the Shtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once
neck and flowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious,
people were, what were their relations to one another, and what they
pride-so Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it-that Madame Stahl had
happened, felt an inexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and
attractive to men. She was like a fine flower, already past its bloom
her manner of life, she would find an example of what she was now so
exquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness' sake don't
Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the
about these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother told

with a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of the
of the way? A companion, she must be. If you like, I'll make

out what was the matter.
It's simply a scandal!"
the arm and led him away."

Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenka
"What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!" said the
such invalids."
a fancy to Varenka.
Mademoiselle...."
"I have long wished for this too," she said.
And Varenka went after them.
by his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health and
more than ten years continuously abroad, in the south, never leaving
Madame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called
After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by
evening and brought a roll of music with her. The princess had invited

Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent,
to look down on everything, to be calm independently of everything? How
"Let's skip that," said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let her eyes
When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea.
ones. I cared for someone once, and I used to sing him that song."

she kissed her. "If I could only be even a little like you!"
"But he didn't disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but he was a
not of her, but of Kitty.
Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty's hand.


window. "Kitty, it's cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors."
home in time for _maman's_ tea at twelve o'clock. She went indoors,


religion having nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known
of one's youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human
story, and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not help
past, desiring nothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of
deal, seek out those who were in trouble, wherever she might be living,
principles in imitation of Varenka.
The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament
exaggeration. But the princess saw that her daughter was rushing into
exaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that she felt her


could not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kitty
good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered
him, as for all consumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to
of Anna Pavlovna's coolness?
well. And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes,
Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Prince
was affected, which did not altogether suit her. The prince, on the
prince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything that

she watched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the June
"Present me to your new friends," he said to his daughter, squeezing
extolling Kitty to the skies before her face, and calling her a
them carrying an elegant red bag.
her friend. "Where are you off to in such haste?"
"Come, so we shall see all your friends," he went on, "even Madame
"What is a Pietist, papa?" asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what she
This man lifted his straw hat, showed his scanty curly hair and high


swollen veins stood out like cords on his thin white neck.
prince."
"What, when...." He coughed and waved his hand. The prince took off his
"Oh, here's Madame Stahl," said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,
with extreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so

wonders what is the goal of this life?... The other side!" she said
"Ah!" cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standing
"Did you know her before her illness, prince-that's to say before she
"Papa, it's not possible!" cried Kitty.
knows."
lying there. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay
Shtcherbatskys were staying.
assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadow
was not the water had cured Kitty, but his splendid cookery, especially


"Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn't know what to
institutions," said the colonel.




at your helping."

to go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was
"And it serves me right! And it serves me right!" Kitty cried quickly,
on purpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere
"But with what object?"

"Everything. I can't act except from the heart, and you act from

what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? What am I to
"I really didn't mean to hurt you," said Varenka, smiling.
living. The efforts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable,
"I shall never marry."

of going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to
Ivanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other a
every such conversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of
method, drunkenness, and lying. If he had been asked whether he liked
and could not contrast himself with them. Moreover, although he had
continually observing new points in them, altering his former views of

with a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by the
brother, the more and more frequently the thought struck him that this
was a right thing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently
through all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.
"You wouldn't believe," he would say to his brother, "what a pleasure

Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and
uttered a few keen and weighty observations, respectfully appreciated

plough; when from the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there comes

of the woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view of the fallow
and that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his



"Well, let's be going," he said.

We pay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no
Levin.
"Self-respect!" said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother's words;
obviously paying little attention to what he was saying.
to be original and genuine, and to dislike everything conventional-I
them, and don't help them because to your mind it's of no importance."
"It's both," he said resolutely: "I don't see that it was possible...."
"Oh, well, that's unfair ... I can quote to you thousands of
got hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his
the subject; but he promptly made a new plan of attack. He was silent
is as a workman of more use and value to you."
points, so that there was no knowing to which to reply. "Do you admit
The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.


institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to my

in which I don't live-to serve on a jury and try a peasant who's stolen
But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.
concerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty thousand roubles of
"I'm not going to be tried. I shan't murder anybody, and I've no need
point, though he did really understand at once what his brother meant.
if it is not founded on self-interest, that's a universal principle, a
indispensable connection which exists between individual and social
philosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, and
unintelligible because he was not capable of expressing his meaning

mowing for whole days together with the peasants. Ever since his
might feel about it with his brother or the peasants.

tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day."
said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.
such hard work, that one has no time to think about it."


Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to
wrinkled, beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out

"Press more on the heel," said another.
paces. Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightest
once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting his scythe.
scythe, began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by
with his own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.
mowing away, the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and
enjoying the pleasant coolness of it.
once conscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was badly
"Lunch, sir," said the old man.
"The hay will be spoiled," he said.

turned out, taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and

the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and
string of mowers and at what was happening around in the forest and the
It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which had
it on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw it
long he had been working he would have said half an hour-and it was
more rows; the old man stopped.
All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. The peasants
The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dined
when the sun had passed to the other side of the bush and reached him.
ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part of
quickly in the sky. He felt no weariness; all he wanted was to get his
Upland's to be cut-there'll be some vodka."

jingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. The grass
the forest. The sun sank behind the forest. The dew was falling by now;
man, who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as
big, plaited shoes with firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the

Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced
"Mercy! what do you look like!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the first
"Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expect
his brother's side. "But what did you do while it was raining?"
watched him with a smile.
all of them are still abroad."
"I shall be delighted," said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. The

a gentleman's work.' Altogether, I fancy that in the people's ideas
"Altogether," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, "you're satisfied with your
"Eh! our conversation yesterday?" said Levin, blissfully dropping his
the French say, too _primesauti`ere_ a nature; you must have intense,
"Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won't stand up for my view,"
there."
"It's much better."
Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural
nearly forty miles from Levin's Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at
given instructions about everything that he considered necessary. What
with pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a little
was pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of
unpleasantness of the town, that life there, though not luxurious-Dolly
kitchen maid to be found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words
strayed into the garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one
exerted herself to the utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position,
useful person, Marya Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured
a week's time everything actually had come round. The roof was mended,
Philimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board. They even rigged up a
her husband who did not love her. And besides, hard though it was for
frequently aware of those joys. Often, looking at them, she would make
Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less
intimate, philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and her

little shoulder-cape. The dress was set right, but there was nearly a
attire, came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.
time in the looking-glass she was satisfied with herself. She looked
jacket from behind; but all the same he was wonderfully sweet. Tanya
whistling, and, what was worse, was disobedient to the English
way, as she passed the drawing-room, she beheld a scene, filling her
through his sobs, "Eat yourself; let's eat it together ... together."
tears and jam.
bathing. A roar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never
went to the bathing-place. The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses,
buttons, Darya Alexandrovna, who had always liked bathing herself, and
shyly. Marya Philimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and
"Yes, she has been ill."

"It's our custom; for three fasts...."
many children, and such fine ones. The peasant women even made Darya

one was better able to appreciate her grandeur than Levin.
me. I got a note from Stiva that you were here."
have come from her own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not

"No, I'll walk. Children, who'd like to race the horses with me?" The
that they saw in their mother's face. On his invitation, the two elder
And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly



change in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin's knowledge of

affected."
"I? I'm not angry with her," said Levin.

guessed it was so."

She interrupted him.


"No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views about
choose, she can only answer 'yes' or 'no.'"
"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him

nothing."
clearly," she went on musingly. "So you won't come to see us, then,
to the little girl who had come in.

"But why are you going? Do stay a little."
Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball. Darya Alexandrovna,
She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak
He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.
acres. When Levin took over the management of the estate, he thought on
arrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year the
into the matter.
the hay fields and examined the stacks. The haystacks could not
matter was decided by the peasants taking these eleven stacks,
After the women came the men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows
growing haycocks. "Since dinner time they've carried a good half of
"Who's that? Your son?" asked Levin.
"Yes, it's two years last St. Philip's day."
standing on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the
save her every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening his

untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through a
measures of this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and
tried to cheat him, those very peasants had greeted him good-humoredly,
men who led this life; but today for the first time, especially under
spend the night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still
morning. Rousing himself, Levin got up from the haycock, and looking at
longed to live now. The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life
"I'll work it out later. One thing's certain, this night has decided my

on which he was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the
ribbons of a white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of
for him all the brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was
She did not look out again. The sound of the carriage-springs was no
There, in the remote heights above, a mysterious change had been
Chapter 13
to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances. "He
in him against her, was aware at the same time of a rush of that
usual urbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he
He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out after


committed a crime. I have only to find the best way out of the
quite irrational _ridicule_ falls to the lot of these men, yet I never
And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who had
youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing himself in a position
"There's no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it's not the same
his head as though to dispel such silly ideas. "What sense is there in
the matter would never come to real danger, it would amount to my
mental review all the instances he knew of divorces (there were plenty
conditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife's
divorce either. Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an
a long while after, he sat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and
cannot be unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy."
duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey
decision had been finally adopted, another weighty consideration
reformation could lead to nothing but falsity; though in passing
Alexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with his wife

"The horses can be taken out and I will see no one," he said in answer
of address to her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural
conversation. Having carefully considered everything, I am writing now
the contrary event, you can conjecture what awaits you and your son.
"_P.S._-I enclose the money which may be needed for your expenses."
with a massive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with the
playing with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near
Alexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the
him in his official career, to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to be
reserve, his honesty, and with his self-confidence had made his career,
actually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and
conscientious and musical family: all the daughters played on stringed
province. But in compensation he gave no quarter to the enemy either.
proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their prosperity, and that
from the-(1) political, (2) administrative, (3) economic, (4)
Alexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for

that now everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more
When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her mind was
question a burning blush of shame spread over her face. She knew what

The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came

meaning to her. The idea of seeking help in her difficulty in religion
what she hoped for. Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or
Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.
slipped in and ate one of them on the sly."
cold to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him
She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked
to go to greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making
bewildered and delighted the boy, and she kissed him. "Leave him to
She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. "Can I help loving

the wind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the
away, and taking my son with me. I don't know the law, and so I don't
She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas. "No," she said
the sheet with the phrase she had written into tiny bits. "No need of
open; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper
prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands
here ... I attach particular significance to compliance...." she read.
she had been able to conceive.
pleased with himself. Haven't I striven, striven with all my strength,
worse ruin yet...."
him, I should be acting like the most infamous, basest of women. He
happiness. I'll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants
position, however false and dishonorable it might be.
precious to her, that she would not have the strength to exchange it
children cry when they are punished.
I know? What do I want? What is there I care for?" Again she felt that
ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.

the most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer of
at the door, and, taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized
to see him. But neither the first nor the second nor the third course
home-worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,
the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.
Tushkevitch-"with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there where
before, she could not have explained. She had said it simply from the
feel offended. One would think you were afraid my society would
hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt persuaded
was contrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted
Alexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee-that's no affair of

Without a moment's thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy's
upon Liza Merkalova.
"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna, after
They've flung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and
restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals of that
cares to inquire. You know in decent society one doesn't talk or think

humorously. Possibly you are inclined to look at things too

about as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes
size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling them
Sappho laughed still more festively.
such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on
in perfect harmony with her style of beauty. Liza was as soft and
There was in her the glow of the real diamond among glass imitations.
so want to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn't it awful?" she said,
"Oh, I like it," said Anna.

is there to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be
niece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her. On meeting Anna
just said."


of the highest and most opposite kind," he said to her.
her hair in both hands-she said good-bye and went away.

comrade at the writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without
man would long ago have been in difficulties, would have been forced to
sake of clearness. Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he found
money at the time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin
the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. He would
thousand, was left undivided between the brothers. At the time when the
year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had
army, but not to lead a life which was a scandal to all good society.
remembered his generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the
Having finished this business, he wrote a cold and cutting answer to
what he ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very
adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he could
She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and he
non-existent honor of the woman he loved.
But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, which
wrong.
interest of his life, of which none knew but he.
not, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he
Karenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general
As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as
same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my ships. If I remain in the



with him for not coming first to him when he came to the regiment.
step of the balcony and was loudly shouting across the band that played

which settles on the faces of men who are successful and are sure of
"Here he is!" shouted the colonel. "Yashvin told me you were in one of
"You look after him," the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing to

superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially in cavalry attack, and
Serpuhovskoy. "I'm glad you've been seeing her pretty often."
Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face. "I was
"Perhaps you wouldn't confess to it if you hadn't been successful,"

"What's done can't be undone, and you know I never go back on what I've
"Yes, but that's not the only thing. Such men as you are wanted."
such an absurdity. "_Tout ca est une blague_. That's always been and
the sun and center as we have. They can be bought either by money or by
Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by the

forever."
friendship rises above all that sort of thing. Yes," he said, smiling
listen: we're the same age, you've known a greater number of women
Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey
And that's what I felt when I was married. My hands were suddenly set
tearing it away from someone else."
footman had not come to call them again, as he supposed. The footman

four. He sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat,
had been grazed the day before by his fall, and leaning back he drew
The scent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularly
landscape just finished and freshly varnished.
picturing to himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. "And as I
movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders,
the veil, transformed his mood at once.
unconsciously passing over him.
everything ... told him I could not be his wife, that ... and told him
reading his thoughts from the expression of his face. She could not
confirmed her still more in this. But this interview was still of the
her glove.
"Who's that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladies
husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried away
himself-and he knew that this thought he could not tell her.

Vronsky meant that after the duel-inevitable, he thought-things could
leave him, and I can't and won't do that."
me," she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to say what
He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in his
"Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him," she said
Vronsky, and drove home.
speech he intended to make. But he did not really need these documents.
before him, and at the air of weariness with which his head drooped on
speeches, the first person sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little

the return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a
come. She went into the dining-room on the pretext of giving some
dejectedly before him. She saw him before he saw her, and she saw that
obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. Several times he
"No, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent

my name is not disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations
pity for him, and she felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted to
interpretation you put on my words."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?"

hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him. The delight he had
surrounded with hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily
natural order of things. And in this struggle he saw that with immense
would not have had the money to pay his laborers' wages), while they
patches where the clover was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no
never occurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned the
aftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the
position in regard to the land. He saw where his boat leaked, but he
come; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, who
only hate me all the more, as she's bound to. And besides, how can I
Kitty's use. "I'm told you have a side-saddle," she wrote to him; "I
shameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate

cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the

road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered
old man's account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked

put them on, while they have dinner."
him.
cultivated himself with his family and two hired laborers. The old man
farming going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he
and he could not say enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.
said he. "Look at Sviazhsky's, for instance. We know what the land's
coming in.


Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. And this
exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man
be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views from
being done in Russia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a
lived with his wife on such terms that their affectionate childless
could not say "a fool," because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and
Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked

those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers' wages, and so on,
The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marsh

he had not complete freedom of ideas, because he was in an agony of
low-necked bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had
here. Here, he feels in his proper place. He has so much to do, and he
see it.
sideways, with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while




it, was apparently amused by it.

Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
serf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the
spoke his own individual thought-a thing that very rarely happens-and a
anything else-the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us by
primitive condition. That's how I see it."

cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and
him into expressing his serious opinion:-
even know how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won't be able to
ruin them. And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to a
"To get what's left me sold by auction? No, thank you."
positively laughing with satisfaction.
Moreover, this question on Levin's part was not quite in good faith.
Sviazhsky's famling, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor and
they're working it out; so there's no question of rent."

other person's idea, and particularly partial to his own. He stuck to
"that it's impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which the
guarantee for all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been
"That's just what I was meaning," answered Levin. "Why shouldn't we
"Oh, yes; we'll bury the world under our caps! We've found the secret
Mulhausen experiment? That's a fact by now, as you're probably aware."
"Excuse me...."
stirred as he had never been before by the idea that the
of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to



laughing.


Tried it: worse. That's just how it is with us. I say political
wants. So much the worse, since they won't be capable of satisfying
"Well, you're saying it yourself! What's wanted to prevent her taking
him poor."
people will become richer, will have more leisure-and then there will
"No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear it
All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by
the work he had been doing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for
imagination amending his own replies.
while, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our labor force.
be greater, and the share of labor will be greater too. And to do this
remorse for some utterly base action. Most important of all-he must get
struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though not
was stupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so a long
On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition
expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all he had to say,
deal but never said what was their real object. Moreover (Levin felt
these difficulties he got his way, and by autumn the system was
collecting together a gang of workers to help him, principally of his
It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than before,
on the plea that the time was too short. It is true that the peasants
It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens
gleam in Ryezunov's eyes which showed so plainly both ironical
August he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their
read both the economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he
which Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russia
Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything
him. He knew what he wanted. He saw that Russia has splendid land,
occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, and that their
peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits
delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad. But
journey. He gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff
under his hood, and he looked cheerfully about him at the muddy streams
of cattle.
our district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because

him in connection with his book. Today all the significance of his book
After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of

some honor from the Tsar for it.' Indeed and it is a strange thing; why
"Of one's soul's salvation we all know and must think before all else,"
"Well, whatever you do, if he's a lazy good-for-nought, everything'll

carriage over the mud.
Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a
humor, the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed
his brother Nikolay had been before in his emaciation and sickliness,
to a long while, but I've been unwell all the time. Now I'm ever so
as his share.
do-combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.
I'll spend a month or two with you, and then I'm off to Moscow. Do you
because she would look after him, as though he were an invalid.
then he could speak without hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans
to speak of it, and so whatever they said-not uttering the one thought
put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.
was here in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit

said in despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to the
and happiness. "And now that bent, hollow chest ... and I, not knowing


his tenderest points.
like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had


Utopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the
from the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to
hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and
"Oh, all right, that's what you think-and let me alone!" answered

"Ah, generosity!" said Nikolay, and he smiled. "If you want to be
know, that I'm in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other


strength.
The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met
temporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch

all Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in

various persons to the prince. They had race horses, and Russian
was used to princes, but, either because he had himself changed of
Russian amusements, was contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women,
himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But for
return from a bear hunt, at which they had had a display of Russian
instant of the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her, in
fell asleep. He waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made

Vronsky got out of his sledge and went to the door. The door opened,
carriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and
in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna-who
footsteps. He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him,
won't ... I can't quarrel with you. Of course you couldn't come. No, I

She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that he had
"Why so? Isn't it the life all of you, all young men, always lead?" she

She interrupted him. "It was that Th'er`ese you used to know?"

her, horrified him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact,
at the time when she was speaking of the actress there was an evil
driven away the fiend," she added. The fiend was the name they had
"No; how so?" she replied. "He's seen a great deal, anyway; he's
"How is it you're defending him?" he said, smiling.
"Yes; but I can't help it. You don't know what I have suffered waiting
"How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?" Her voice
bowed to him. He smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep
"What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?"

doing? What is the matter? What has been wrong with you, and what did


"I don't understand," he said, understanding her.
"Yes, it's better so," she said, tightly gripping his hand. "That's the

something."
hands...."
childbirth you'll die, ma'am, you'll die....' And I woke up."
soft, solemn, blissful attention. He could not comprehend the meaning
carefully scrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a
out his threat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the
vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the
voice there was a determination and firmness such as his wife had never
quickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her most

for you to insult me?" she said.

and child for a lover, while you eat your husband's bread!"
"What am I saying it for? what for?" he went on, as angrily. "That you
have the satisfaction of animal passion...."
was utterly unable to articulate the word "suffering." In the end he

decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of
him. Good-bye!"

clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances

it, went to the door.
courts he disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting
The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard,
covered with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his little hands
strictly private."

"I have the misfortune," Alexey Alexandrovitch began, "to have been

you to decide."

"Divorce by our laws," he said, with a slight shade of disapprobation
defect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the husband or of the
"-May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the married
education," he said, "but I imagine that to you this is
importance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certain
At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave
confidence to me, you will do well to leave me the choice of the

to let me know what are your terms."


its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, and
the adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs,
measures in the same direction. These measures, still further
Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failing health, in spite of his
was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no one could tell

opinion annoyed her indeed.

on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of


"I was very busy. Delighted to see you!" he said in a tone clearly
celebrities."
Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the
caress to his wife and children, and walked jauntily along the
genially to an acquaintance who drove by.
face, radiant over her present. Besides the gift of the necklace he
Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must see, so as to be
would be a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pi`ece de
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and
the rumors he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch
his predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch had

"I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number
without taking off his coat and hat.
"Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?" said
question is that of the relation of the working people to the land;


to Levin.

"I'm a nice person! Why, that's just what I came for! You simply must

Stepan Arkadyevitch lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was four
secondly, to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The deputation,
busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them

of Stepan Arkadyevitch's voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing with
"There, you see, you're talking nonsense, and he's at home!" responded
relations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife against
"I want to tell you that I can't dine at your house, because the terms
Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected. He
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had the
opinion of her-for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I
cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite made up my
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at him
I have always had for you ... and sincere esteem," said Stepan
you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her. She's a

"Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to know his work
Arkadyevitch. "I've just been seeing him, and he's really a capital

chuckled, and went out.
Koznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door at the same
they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed
gown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have their
in silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, and
performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He
plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered
he was going back to the drawing-room.
blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.
evening when he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he
truth? Why shouldn't it be the truth?" he thought.
saw him the very instant he walked into the room. She had been

"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he would sob
"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,

Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most

to him.
Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent his

bears on your place?" she added, turning her charming little head to
"No, we've been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back from
elevated language, and ... you, too," he said, addressing Karenin and
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down
The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was

with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles."
consist? The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest
civilization?" said Pestsov.

for classical studies being given a preeminence over scientific
development. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the
"But," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing Karenin,
"If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilistic
especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found
government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains
only so that it can be considered dangerous.
"You said rights," said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov had
juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing

avoid them."
regretted that he had not made this comparison. Even Alexey
said Sergey Ivanovitch.
Arkadyevitch was thinking of.
the sauce.
for him. It even struck him as strange that they should be so eager to
stirred in both a sense of glad terror before the unknown into which
four-in-hand? It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in a

"Not horrid, but nothing in him."
confiding smile, "all Dolly's children had scarlet fever, and he
who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently to
Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of
infidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and
this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the


smiled affectedly.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution looking

said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture. She

"No, no, it can't be! No, for God's sake, you are mistaken," said
son, all that's a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again," he
of everything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my
"I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me to
trois_."
Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyes
"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna
getting up.
Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him
said, with tones of hatred in his voice.
quietly took leave and went away.
in the drawing-room.
least interested in what he said himself, and even less so in what they

people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure of
what he liked himself, which he was devising arguments to defend, and,


in the family without humiliation, while she herself...."

he took the chalk. "Wait a minute," he said, sitting down to the table.
likelihood that she could make out this complicated sentence; but he

the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the
"And n... and now?" he asked.
She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.
with happiness, he saw all he needed to know. And he wrote three
she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that he
death, of those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her.
Levin's hand with emotion.
brother.


silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, he
read the minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but
nobly. Levin listened to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums

"Most delighted," he said, and asked after his wife and sister-in-law.
the whole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful
Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the


wife?"

cross, then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed
silent, but full of meaning for him, and the mounting lurid yellow
Shtcherbatskys. The visitors' doors were closed and everything was


was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight.
and told him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys'. The sledge-driver was

"Pray walk in! Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would have

approaching him. She did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to

Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Without thinking, without asking
