as if he had recognized himself for the first time. He stood there
reality of the description flashed across him. Yes, there would be a
as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other

silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till
are you?-you who are finer than any of them!"

"You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.
face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal

across the room and rang the bell for tea. "You will have tea, of
had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn't really
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."
went over and poured out the tea. The two men sauntered languidly to
"It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
in the picture?"


do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old
"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."
from the tea-table with an amused smile.


sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.
if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called
foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months
for being a pack of Radicals. He was a hero to his valet, who bullied
five."
when they grow older they know it. But I don't want money. It is only
now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure

christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret
afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she
by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her,
his mother was very beautiful?"
humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an
"They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.
rising to go.
"She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do. It is the
friends, and nothing about my old ones."

been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a
with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat
that-perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited
life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence of one who
first analyzed it? Was it not Buonarotti who had carved it in the
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they
good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample
had to say before he was thirty. His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur,
"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess,
dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.


Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.
extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it."
assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."
"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.
East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love
ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid

emotional."

me how to become young again."


before her like frightened forest things. Her white feet trod the huge
but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips
ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are
other ladies.
England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of

has a perfect host, and a perfect library."

me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so
CHAPTER IV.
Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies
found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the
thought-"
vague forget-me-not eyes. She was a curious woman, whose dresses always
anybody's. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other

any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray? You must come. I can't afford
smile. "So sorry I am late, Dorian. I went to look after a piece of old
as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the
"Because they are so sentimental."

"Who is she?"
the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of
supper. The other women are very charming. They commit one mistake,

after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins. As I lounged in
remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we
air of gorgeous servility. There was something about him, Harry, that
always be in love with love. A _grande passion_ is the privilege of


"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."
toujours tort_."
beer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad. He was played by the
Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came
follow. Why should I not love her? Harry, I do love her. She is
women never appeal to one's imagination. They are limited to their


Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Of course I know her. On the first night I was at the theatre, the
"Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers. I told him I
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,
"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian-a great distinction. Most people

her power. I think we were both rather nervous. The old Jew stood
a play. She knows nothing of life. She lives with her mother, a faded

thought you must have some curious romance on hand. You have; but it is
only for a single act. I get hungry for her presence; and when I think

laughter and grow sad. I want a breath of our passion to stir their

me."
"Let me see. To-day is Tuesday. Let us fix to-morrow. She plays Juliet
reading an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines before
advice."
work. The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his

it. It made him a more interesting study. He had been always enthralled
that to know their properties one had to sicken of them. There were
He was conscious-and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty, and
really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit
of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
promise rich and fruitful results. His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane
were conscious. It often happened that when we thought we were


see you act. You must not think of anything but your acting. Mr. Isaacs
"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,"
over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress. "I love him," she
dream had passed across them.
Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery. This
feel proud, terribly proud. Mother, did you love my father as I love
"My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love. Besides,
gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a
"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the
"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up
fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."
it. It is very sweet of you to let me have your last afternoon. Where
singing as she ran upstairs. Her little feet pattered overhead.
She began to complain. Women defend themselves by attacking, just as

present whether her attachment is serious or not. But there is no doubt



search of an imaginary gallery.

to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or whatever he was going to be.
immense slaughter. Or, no. He was not to go to the gold-fields at all.
more of life. He must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and
of Sibyl's position. This young dandy who was making love to her could
he had brooded on for many months of silence. A chance phrase that he
"What do you want me to say?"
"You have a new friend, I hear. Who is he? Why have you not told me
boy! you should never forget it. If you only saw him, you would think
announce me as a revelation. I feel it. And it is all his, his only,


They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers. The tulip-beds across
caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open
is he? Point him out. I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at that moment
like a dagger. The people round began to gape. A lady standing close to
are talking about. You are simply jealous and unkind. Ah! I wish you
silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in. I am not going

Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting. Jim insisted
downstairs.
hands. He felt that he had a right to know. It should have been told to

"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.

down, and kill him like a dog. I swear it."
was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that she waved the

waiter. "What is it? Nothing about politics, I hope! They don't

Basil."
"But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth. It would be


our moral prejudices. I never take any notice of what common people
egos. They are forced to have more than one life. They become more
yourself. You are much better than you pretend to be."
one whose growth is arrested. If you want to mar a nature, you have
happy. Of course, it is sudden-all really delightful things are. And
Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
You should have seen her! When she came on in her boy's clothes, she
with my love in a forest that no man had ever seen. After the
mother. I don't know what my guardians will say. Lord Radley is sure to
"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.
not make any formal proposal. I told her that I loved her, and she said
one. His nature is too fine for that."
Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head. "You are quite incorrigible,
have known me to be. I am changed, and the mere touch of Sibyl Vane's
in his slow melodious voice. "But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory

immorality."
"One has to pay in other ways but money."
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact. Believe me,
to do something for them."
"This is," interrupted Dorian. "You must admit, Harry, that women give
"You will always like me, Dorian," he replied. "Will you have some
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
there is only room for two in the brougham. You must follow us in a
Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the

poet. Hallward amused himself with watching the faces in the pit. The

Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his
lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of
I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything that is
tremble. Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
white lily. Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;


artist. This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre actress."
life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful experience.
his eyes. His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
and laughing. The whole thing was a _fiasco_. The last act was played
When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
you understand now, don't you?"

nothing but shadows, and I thought them real. You came-oh, my beautiful
love! My love! Prince Charming! Prince of life! I have grown sick of
Dorian, you understand now what it signifies? Even if I could do it, it
shudder ran through him.
of you. I will never mention your name. You don't know what you were to
her voice seemed to catch in her throat. "You are not serious, Dorian?"
there like a trampled flower. "Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she
pleased you. But you are quite right, Dorian. I should have shown
"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice. "I don't wish to
houses. Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after
anodyne for his pain. He followed into the market and watched the men
doors of the coffee-house in the piazza. The heavy cart-horses slipped
was rising. It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.
that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal. As

Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly
He threw himself into a chair and began to think. Suddenly there
think of them. And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the
had suffered also. During the three terrible hours that the play had
But the picture? What was he to say of that? It held the secret of his
Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel
Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for
to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it. When he
CHAPTER VIII.

others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection of
most reasonable rates of interest.
light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round
table. "I shut the window?"
And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing! First in

chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible change?

picture in sickened horror.
lull the moral sense to sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the
loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. He


"I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?"
smiling. "I am perfectly happy now. I know what conscience is, to begin
"Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him

took both his hands in his own and held them tightly. "Dorian," he
I came. There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not
inquest? What did you mean by that? Did Sibyl-? Oh, Harry, I can't bear
it had either prussic acid or white lead in it. I should fancy it was
afterwards we will look in at the opera. It is a Patti night, and
Harry, I think I would have wept over it. Somehow, now that it has
bit. I thought her shallow. Suddenly something happened that made me
interest in life. If you had married this girl, you would have been
"I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room
for them. They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they

exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an
no longer the actors, but the spectators of the play. Or rather we are
And what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals! One should absorb
die. I forget what killed it. I think it was her proposing to sacrifice
never know when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act,
pink ribbons. It always means that they have a history. Others find a
"What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.
"I was terribly cruel to her. You forget that."
everything."

for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because Cordelia was
myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief. "I felt
then?"
anything. What is the number of your sister's box?"
Henry, shaking him by the hand. "Good-bye. I shall see you before
Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself. It was conscious
with him. How had she played that dreadful last scene? Had she cursed

of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips
existed between him and the picture might cease. It had changed in
might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods
would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of summer.
already waiting for him. An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord
into the room.
heart-broken I am about the whole thing. I know what you must suffer.
and looking dreadfully bored. "I was at the opera. You should have come
"You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a

look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come
only taught me to be vain."
shoulder, "you have come too late. Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl
and a shudder ran through him.
She passed again into the sphere of art. There is something of the
and you are furious. How like a sympathetic person! You remind me of a
book in your studio one day and chancing on that delightful phrase.
realized how I have developed. I was a schoolboy when you knew me. I am
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art. He
Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
Charming. It was pretty of her. You must do me a drawing of Sibyl,
The painter stared at him. "My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried. "Do



varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"
be away a month. I should think you could easily spare it for that
that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world would
the face, "we have each of us a secret. Let me know yours, and I shall
fame or reputation."
strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"
worshipped you. I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted
you as Paris in dainty armour, and as Adonis with huntsman's cloak and
me without mist or veil, I cannot tell. But I know that as I worked at
its presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that
right. The picture cannot be shown. You must not be angry with me,
too clever and too cynical to be really fond of. Would there ever be
"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"
the one person in my life who has really influenced my art. Whatever I

"You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.
"Impossible!"
now good-bye. I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
reticences-he understood them all now, and he felt sorry. There seemed

guard.
asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

"No, no," he cried petulantly. "Thank you, Leaf. That will do."
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in. It had perhaps
the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away. Basil would
passions in him that would find their terrible outlet, dreams that
reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!-how shallow, and of what little
about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes. Sitting down at the
with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant. Mr. Hubbard was a
person. I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir. Picked it up at a
"No trouble at all, Mr. Gray. I am delighted to be of any service to
we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"
of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it
He had not entered the place for more than four years-not, indeed,
with his dog-eared schoolbooks. On the wall behind it was hanging the
But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as
their subtlety and their charm. Perhaps, some day, the cruel look would
men are. There would be the wrinkled throat, the cold, blue-veined

am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."

leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.

Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,
having sent him the report. And it was certainly stupid of him to have
stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange
It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,
expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work
produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,


CHAPTER XI.
whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
remarkable. It was with an almost cruel joy-and perhaps in nearly every
rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the
Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
surrendered! and to such little purpose! There had been mad wilful
that is having, in our own day, its curious revival. It was to have its
There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men
letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
fascination for him. As he passed out, he used to look with wonder at
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison. The
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
he flung it away-Procopius tells the story-nor was it ever found again,
and twenty-one diamonds. Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients. The ducal hat of Charles the
extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment in
stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail of purple on
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout
with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver ground,

velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,
possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,
bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work. The orphreys were
to which such things were put, there was something that quickened his
purple-and-gold pall as a curtain. For weeks he would not go there,

that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not
smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another

horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.
dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private life. Even the

Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and
legacy been? Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him some
curiously at him. What of George Willoughby, with his powdered hair and
infamous. He had led the orgies at Carlton House. The star of the
seemed to follow him wherever he went.
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in
colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon
Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of Formosus, and
serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose melancholy
shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles


and foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street, a

all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
Dorian looked at him and smiled. "What a way for a fashionable painter

servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. One

"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own
degraded. Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all
I have heard a good deal since. He offered an extravagant price. I
in London will neither go to your house or invite you to theirs? You
in the Guards who committed suicide. You were his great friend. There
in his voice. "You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it. It
and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with
of a man by the effect he has over his friends. Yours seem to lose all
"I must speak, and you must listen. You shall listen. When you met Lady
you. I remember Harry saying once that every man who turned himself
whether it is so or not. How should I know? But it is said of you. I am
turning almost white from fear.
better for it. I know the age better than you do, though you will prate


straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and stood
am going through? My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and corrupt,
read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question."

"Yes."
Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression. The room looked
curtain back, and you will see mine."
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
picture. In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long

shrill and curious in his ears.
"I remember it! Oh, how well I remember it! No! the thing is
"I was wrong. It has destroyed me."
"There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful. You were to me such an


away our iniquities.' Let us say that together. The prayer of your
as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"
ear by those grinning lips. The mad passions of a hunted animal stirred
the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and stabbing again
He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet. He
slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was
was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went. Now and
thing was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted the
long hands looked! It was like a dreadful wax image.
and put them into it. He could easily burn them afterwards. Then he
had intended. With his curious reserved habits, it would be months
the door very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell. In
"Ten minutes past two? How horribly late! You must wake me at nine
"Oh! I am sorry I didn't see him. Did he leave any message?"

CHAPTER XIV.
had been lost in some delightful dream. Yet he had not dreamed at all.
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride
scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once. He spent a long time
table, sat down and wrote two letters. One he put in his pocket, the
getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lav'ee_," with
Les d^omes, sur l'azur des ondes


been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor
ibises, and white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small

spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken
able to exercise whenever he wished-and, indeed, exercised often
which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed, too-was strangely
glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horribly
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It was useless. The brain
At last the door opened and his servant entered. He turned glazed eyes

searching gaze that he turned on Dorian. He kept his hands in the

have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me. I entirely decline
so that not a vestige of it will be left. Nobody saw this person come


have come to the wrong man. Go to some of your friends. Don't come to
the matter, you are certain to be arrested. Nobody ever commits a crime
would not turn a hair. You would not believe that you were doing
"I have no desire to help you. You forget that. I am simply indifferent

anything in the matter. It is insane of you to ask me."
The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes. Then he stretched
After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and
living man, at any rate. I bore it all. Now it is for me to dictate
A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over. The
"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up

spoke and stood looking out at the garden. Campbell made no answer.
Selby with orchids?"
"No trouble, sir. At what time shall I be back?"
Francis. Or stay: just leave my things out for dressing. You can have

forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,
He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with
if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had
It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library. He

throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his

Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that

so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an
ideas.
insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.
handed round, "what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite out
"How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.

third husband, Lord Henry! You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"
"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian. "I asked her
like? I don't know him."
terms."
"Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

your defects, where would you all be? Not one of you would ever be
great disappointment."
bow.
alliance, and I want you both to be happy."
though. I want it to be a delightful gathering."
to limit myself, for the future."
"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"
as an ornament of oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles

"Oh, yes, Harry."

being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type."

latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in. If you want any
Narborough. I shan't go upstairs. I shall go home. I must go home."
winced. He hated the idea of even touching them.

went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden spring. A
face. Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly
The man shook his head. "It is too far for me," he muttered.


The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to time a
blood had been spilled. What could atone for that? Ah! for that there
hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His throat burned and
he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,
As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all
Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane. Over
promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay. Here and

backed them, making quivering disks of light. The floor was covered
began to whimper.


would know who he was. He wanted to escape from himself.


the women. "We are very proud to-night," she sneered.



if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as
for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of
Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for
and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,
was my sister. She killed herself. I know it. Her death is at your
"You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you
"Eighteen years," said the man. "Why do you ask me? What do years
the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face
Dorian Gray drew a long breath. "You have been on the brink of
street.
close to his. "I knew you were following him when you rushed out from
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me
"Strike me dumb if it ain't so. He is the worst one that comes here.


Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of the last
"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess,
truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to things.
"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.


"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys. You, as a good
"Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.
"I could not use it. It is too true."







a mediocrity."
mock sadness.
"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after

"And found it, Mr. Gray?"
"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his




go and help him. I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."
"In the Parthian manner?"

dinner. I will take your place."

tracked down, had begun to dominate him. If the tapestry did but
imagination. It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet of
not know who he was, could not know who he was. The mask of youth had
the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder. Oh! in what a
was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had caused

and rough undergrowth.
ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns that
cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey. Let it live."

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the
After a few moments-that were to him, in his perturbed state, like
He could not finish the sentence.
"What is?" asked Lord Henry. "Oh! this accident, I suppose. My dear


you. I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on the
in," he said, coldly. The man turned round and went rapidly in the

"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."

"I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it. Ah! here is the duchess,
sorry they told you about the man. It is a hideous subject."
Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled. "It is nothing,




"The button from your foil," he answered. "You have dropped it."
in every tingling fibre of his body. Life had suddenly become too
the sunlight. The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.
drawer and spread it out before him.

had suddenly stopped beating. "A sailor?" he cried out. "Did you say a
"Some money, sir-not much, and a six-shooter. There was no name of any
luck."
He lashed her across the neck with his crop. She cleft the dusky air
discovery that would either make or mar his life. Then he thrust the
seemed to Lord Arthur that this hobby of the good Dean's offered him an
winter.  Count Rouvaloff was supposed to be writing a life of Peter the
Lord Arthur had told him the object of his mission; but Lord Arthur, who
'Scotland Yard would give a good deal to know this address, my dear
French Laundry, as a perfect network of clothes-lines was stretched
very wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a fork in his left hand.
ladyship is quite well.  Do you mind sitting with me while I finish my
foreign exportation, as, even if they succeed in passing the Custom


Lord Arthur's face brightened up when he saw it.  'That is just what I
some friends of mine in Moscow.  Still, I might send it off to-morrow.'
'And now,' said Lord Arthur, rising from his seat, 'pray let me know how
'Oh, that is nothing!  It is a pleasure to me.  I do not work for money;
news.  All the afternoon the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams
having black Bishops in every province, and for some reason or other had
condition.  The little German, however, while admitting that something
but even here he was destined to disappointment, for two days afterwards,
                                                             27_th_ _May_.
    we live in an age of unbelief.
    we were all sitting there on Friday morning, when just as the clock
    schoolroom, and does nothing but have small explosions all day long.
    absurd, their anxiety about dress, when there are so many more
    shows that people read his sermons, and profit by them.


die, some cause to which a man can give his life, and as life had no
down the next evening, and look at an explosive umbrella, that went off
twelve o'clock boomed from the tall tower at Westminster, and at each

softly up behind.  In a moment he had seized Mr. Podgers by the legs, and
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and Sybil's name came to his lips.
For the next few days he alternated between hope and fear.  There were
took up the _St. James's_, and was listlessly turning over its pages,
    just in front of the Ship Hotel.  The unfortunate gentleman had been

laughing through her tears.
that they had never seen a handsomer couple than the bride and
she was sitting with Lady Arthur under a lime-tree in the garden,




all my life.'

frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
'My Lord,' answered the Minister, 'I will take the furniture and the
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
I warned you.'
really wonderful amount of animal spirits.  Indeed, in many respects, she
fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large

Canterville Chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with clouds,
bid you welcome to Canterville Chase.'  Following her, they passed
'Yes, madam,' replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, 'blood has been
mysterious circumstances.  His body has never been discovered, but his


any Christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night I have not

upstairs.  The whole family were now quite interested; Mr. Otis began to
o'clock, when they had a light supper.  The conversation in no way turned
travelling; and the sweetness of the New York accent as compared to the
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
green light.  Just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted.  He thought of the
with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
always obliged to wear a black velvet band round her throat to hide the
and throw pillows at his head!  It was quite unbearable.  Besides, no
THE next morning when the Otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
bedrooms.'
Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright emerald-green.  These
become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while,
darkness.  On reaching the top of the staircase he recovered himself, and
will find it a most excellent remedy.'  The ghost glared at her in fury,
most violent agitation.  The vulgarity of the twins, and the gross
Virgin Queen herself.  Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
spent most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding
blood-stain, by means of Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent.  Having reduced
determined to teach them a lesson.  The first thing to be done was, of

stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his
wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into
light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to
jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler.  Once in the
happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from its hollow

head, swore, according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique
consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was exceedingly
CHAPTER IV
symbolic value of sensuous phenomena.  The question of phantasmic
against being either heard or seen.  He removed his boots, trod as
unmolested.  Strings were continually being stretched across the

had been a great success.  It was, however, an extremely difficult
which I should mention was called the Blue Bed Chamber, on account of the
might have been very serious.
States Minister and his wife, which had now taken the place of the
was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a
which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse, euchre, poker,
and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters
it will be found in the third volume of Lord Tattle's _Recollections of
1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in
CHAPTER V
her immense surprise, however, it was the Canterville Ghost himself!  He
'I am so sorry for you,' she said, 'but my brothers are going back to
wicked.  Mrs. Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about
the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,
look at, and not at all easy to paint.  I never told on you, though I was


'Please don't go, Miss Virginia,' he cried; 'I am so lonely and so
beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; 'for three hundred years I have not
'Far away beyond the pine-woods,' he answered, in a low dreamy voice,


    When a golden girl can win
because I have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because I have no
firmly, 'and I will ask the Angel to have mercy on you.'
goggle eyes, blinked at her from the carven chimney-piece, and murmured

evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs. Otis was not at all
and two of the farm-servants.  The little Duke of Cheshire, who was
insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off
The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace, and
station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him that
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.  Not the slightest trace of
Virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest
entreaties of the little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that
her passionately in her arms, the Duke smothered her with violent kisses,
capered about.

seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers an
the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was

coat-of-arms.  By the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
most impressive manner by the Rev. Augustus Dampier.  When the ceremony
The next morning, before Lord Canterville went up to town, Mr. Otis had
you, accordingly, to take them to London with you, and to regard them
in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain
any form, and can only account for it by the fact that Virginia was born
clearly hers, and, egad, I believe that if I were heartless enough to
in the corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you
is the reward of all good little American girls, and was married to her
should be forgotten.'  His objections, however, were completely
initials of the old gentleman's name, and the verse from the library

what Life is, and what Death signifies, and why Love is stronger than

ONE afternoon I was sitting outside the Caf'e de la Paix, watching the
for his frankness.  I found him a good deal changed.  He looked anxious
understood.'
of the Madeleine.
it to me.  I opened it.  Inside there was the photograph of a woman.  She
which is psychological, not plastic-and the faint smile that just played
When the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of
It fascinated me immediately.  All that night I kept thinking of it, and
quite innocently, "I think I caught sight of you in Bond Street some time
if any one was near us, and then said, "Yes; to-morrow at a quarter to
her a letter, asking if I might be allowed to try my chance some other
'All through the season I saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of
was infatuated with her: in spite of the mystery, I thought then-in
in Regent's Park.  I wanted to get to Piccadilly, and took a short cut
in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones that
continued.  She stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said,
congestion of the lungs.  I shut myself up and saw no one.  I had loved
opened it to me.  I asked her if she had any rooms to let.  "Well, sir,"
simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had
for mystery.  She took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with

unemployed.  The poor should be practical and prosaic.  It is better to
looking-glass, put the second on a shelf between _Ruff's Guide_ and
To make matters worse, he was in love.  The girl he loved was Laura

_b^ete_ and beautiful, people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and
wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous
think so!  Such beggars as he are not to be met with every day.  A
'How much does a model get for sitting?' asked Hughie, as he found

I'm very busy.  Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.'
wretched that Hughie could not help pitying him, and felt in his pockets
he had done.  He spent the day with Laura, got a charming scolding for
'Finished and framed, my boy!' answered Trevor; 'and, by the bye, you
bits.'
business is to realise the world as we see it, not to reform it as we
very red and angry.
Baron Hausberg.  He is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and
laughter.  'My dear boy, you'll never see it again.  _Son affaire c'est
to-day to any one; and when you came in I didn't know whether Hausberg
dinner.'
However, Hughie wouldn't stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and
Monsieur Erskine?'
bring you this letter'; and he extended a sealed envelope.

I HAD been dining with Erskine in his pretty little house in Birdcage
degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise one's own personality on



gilded points, and the peacock-blue background against which it showed up
whose beauty Art has so happily preserved for us?'


'I am sure of it,' I answered.  'Pembroke, Shakespeare, and Mrs. Mary

said Erskine, laughing; 'but it may interest you.'
is always an advantage not to have received a sound commercial education,
a costermonger, and had the manners of a farmer.  I remember seeing him
pleasure were poetry and acting.  At Eton he was always dressing up and
wonderfully handsome.  People who did not like him, Philistines and
spoiled.  All charming people, I fancy, are spoiled.  It is the secret of
thing.  It made an immense sensation, and the horrid little theatre, as
If you do, you will be sorry for it.
working purely by internal evidence, had found out who Mr. W. H. really
Indeed, whoever he was, he could not have been anybody of high birth, as
And ends the sonnet by congratulating himself on the mean state of him he
his view read me Sonnets CXXIV. and CXXV., in which Shakespeare tells us
Shakespeare's acquaintance with Mr. W. H. must have begun in 1594, or at
imagine that any publisher of the time, and the preface is from the
he needed no entreaties to marry; he was not beautiful; he did not
'As for the other suggestions of unfortunate commentators, that Mr. W. H.
moment that the Sonnets are mere satires on the work of Drayton and John
less terrible despair.
beauty was such that it became the very corner-stone of Shakespeare's
    As high as learning my rude ignorance,
demonstrable proof or formal evidence, but on a kind of spiritual and
    For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
that had seemed obscure, or evil, or exaggerated, became clear and
preferred to call him, Willie Hughes.  The Christian name he found of
from those sonnets in which curious puns are made on the words "use" and
Hughes-
    Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
the play upon words (use=Hughes) being of course obvious, and the phrase
W. H.; but otherwise the theory would fall to the ground.  I put this
problematical.  Cyril was in a dreadful state, and used to go over the
evening at eight o'clock.  When I arrived, he said to me, "The only
very fine example of Elizabethan work, he had, of course, brought with
clean it, and, to his great joy, saw that he had fallen by mere chance on

or facsimiled, and placed as the frontispiece to Cyril's edition of the
common-looking wife-his model, as I subsequently learned.  I told him how
said-"Oh, that is nothing.  I did not know it was in this portfolio.  It
forgery.  He grew very pale and said-"I did it purely for your sake.  You
'Yes; he shot himself with a revolver.  Some of the blood splashed upon
the slightest degree invalidate the truth of the theory; and, that in

fatal about the idea, and intellectually there is nothing to be said for
thing,-don't let his death be in vain.'
suicide was contained in the letter to me, and of this letter the public
of yourself, and don't follow a trail that leads nowhere.  You start by
about Willie Hughes any more.  I am sorry I told you anything about it,
London.  The white swans were lying asleep on the polished lake, and the
through the curtains of my room in long slanting beams of dusty gold.  I
the 67th.  In the first of these, Shakespeare, complimenting Willie
lines that would be unintelligible if they were not addressed to an
form and phase of fancy, to embody each dream of the creative
in the 67th Sonnet, Shakespeare calls upon Willie Hughes to abandon the
    And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
The 111th Sonnet is especially bitter:-

The boy-player of Rosalind had nothing to gain from marriage, or from the
                                   PROMISED

Sonnet, where, in the bitterness of his heart at the defection of the
says, is this beauty of yours if it be not used:-


Muse,' as he calls them, and intended, as Meres tells us, for private
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
    And to be praised of ages yet to be.

    Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room

passion, {1} the lord of his love to whom he was bound in vassalage, {2}



    Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
Shakespeare, who, whatever his fellow-partners may have thought of the
He could act love, but could not feel it, could mimic passion without
    That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
live in them.

    In either's aptness, as it best deceives,
    To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep.
the howling swan, which, still looking down, waileth her end, but as a
least something to have discovered that Will Hews was an Elizabethan
to wonder what had been his end.
seven months there was no rain.  We know at any rate that _Romeo and
Illumination of the eighteenth century, that splendid movement which,
vineyard outside the city by some young men 'who had found pleasure in
value of objectivity thus showing itself in the rude beginnings of the

copy of my letter, I regret to say, nor have I been able to lay my hand
me.  It seemed to me that I had given away my capacity for belief in the
it came about, and I cannot pretend to explain it, there was no doubt
