




have sent me to some fortress indefinitely."
politeness; "I would not be sure of that. A good opportunity for
of life and death over the surrounding vulgar. From this room, many such
as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country still
"There is not," pursued the nephew, in his former tone, "a face I can
thoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at
That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed. If a picture of the
of the family, if you will not. But you must be fatigued. Shall we
"_We_ have done wrong?" repeated the Marquis, with an inquiring smile,
"Death has done that!" said the Marquis.
will for ever seek them in vain, be assured."
lived."
renounce them."
"--or twenty years hence--"
"To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity,
it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance, may, in
"In England, for example?"
"England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you have
"Yes."
which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly. At the same
looked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door.
night. Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feet making no
the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cap pointing out the

dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust on all the roads.
at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both melting away, like the
the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetest song with all its might.
out, to such pasture as could be found by the roadside. In the church
doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled at iron-grated windows, dogs
at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day's dinner (not
emotions than grim curiosity and surprise. The led cows, hastily brought
and what portended the swift hoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind


living tongue spoken all over the world, and he cultivated a taste for
circumstances of his country, and those were of ever-growing interest.
contraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greek
heard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionate voice;
summer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation,
sometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in the
both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due."
"Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home. I took the opportunity of her

"She is."
"I believe it. I do you justice; I believe it."
"Yes, go on."
ground. At the last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,
"I ask your pardon," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after some


now devoted to you with all the constancy and fervour of her present
have known this, night and day, since I have known you in your home."
Heaven is my witness that I love her!"
should know it to be a baseness. If I had any such possibility, even at
in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes, sharing your

"Not even so. I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks; I
"I do seek that."

heart."

part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you, you will
between me and my other and far dearer self. If she should ever tell me
sake. She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to me
He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken of a
"I wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and have no
promise?"
reading-chair empty.
his door, and softly called to him. The noise ceased at the sound of

a grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before the setting in
his turban off and threw it into the basin in which he had steeped it at
surprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite as

posture. "Sydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you,
"You are a luckier, if you mean that."

"It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar, to

"You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"
"Who is the lady?"

You want that sense altogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when I
please myself: on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself. She
Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I not approve?"
credit. So I have made up my mind. And now, Sydney, old boy, I want to
I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face,

debating of the point, he came to the conclusion that it would be as
plaintiff, there was no getting over his evidence, the counsel for
Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from the Temple,
of the Soho horizon. So, he pushed open the door with the weak rattle
place, or space. He was so much too big for Tellson's, that old clerks
hands with a customer when the House pervaded the air. He shook in a
to the House afar off.
"Oh dear me, sir?" repeated Stryver, drawing back. "Oh dear you, sir?
"Well!" said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand,
eligible, you are eligible."

"Why?" said Stryver. "Now, I'll put you in a corner," forensically
Stryver.
causes and reasons that will tell as such with the young lady. The young
from any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--whose

bar?"

parties in common sense; I can only find it for myself. I suppose sense

soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand, you should be satisfied
hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect you to look

Stryver; "I'll do that for you."
Soho."
am sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor father's

have gained nothing by it. There is no harm at all done. I have not


cared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing,
in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhaps the quiet time
City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst, of health
a change in it.
"God knows it is a shame!"

"If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,
"No, Mr. Carton. I am sure that the best part of it might still be; I am

"Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton? Can I not recall
you have been the last dream of my soul. In my degradation I have not

"Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappy

"Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette. I have proved myself,
"Mr. Carton," she answered, after an agitated pause, "the secret is
the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--and
"Be comforted!" he said, "I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette. An
"My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieve
and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearest ties that will ever

westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastward from the sun,
Tellson's side of the tides to the opposite shore. Brief as such

"Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring, "it's a
to your own father, you young Rip? This boy is a getting too many for
His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissing
always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeral passed
"_I_ don't know," returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouth
"Old Bailey spy," returned his informant. "Yaha! Tst! Yah! Old Bailey
that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating the
enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops; for a
the observation of Tellson's, in the further corner of the mourning
by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach. A bear-leader, a
in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground; finally,
they were roughly hustled and maltreated. The transition to the sport of
behind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers.
himself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on his



another bite.

most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her in
"And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher. "No games to-morrow! If I, as a
know how scarce you mayn't make the wittles and drink here, by your
Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerry

walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held his
himself into two.
He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, and then the
tower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrous giant. They did not
But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, not

like a dropsical boy's kite without tail and wings. It hid in doorways
From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakened after



he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace. He was brushed
that fine morning.


for." As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went on a few yards in advance,

Defarge: but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark, lay hidden in
have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided from seat to seat,
humanity from whose ragged pockets they had come.



bread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinking near


Speak, Jacques Five!"
chain. Behold the manner of it. I leaving my work on the road, the sun


"Good!" said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery. "The tall man
with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!"
going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs. Also, I see that
vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life.
He imitated the action of a man's being impelled forward by the
He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a sounding
my way to my work. There I see him, high up, behind the bars of a lofty
his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender; Jacques Three, equally
at him by stealth, for it is afraid. But it always looks up, from a

strikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that was neither
the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed. They even whisper
I am not a scholar."

even the fountain appears to fall to that tune. At length, on Sunday
"All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out,
They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face,

After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, "Good! You have acted
"How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One. "To be registered?"
The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and began
a word of it--not a syllable of it. Knitted, in her own stitches and her
"He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than would
to thirst for it. Judiciously show a dog his natural prey, if you wish
dread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was very



intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long live the Queen,


confirmation.

a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last been apparent;
Madame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the
the expression of the faces was altered. A rumour just lived in the
crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieur the Marquis petrified, a
star. And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of light and analyse
of the soldiery there, and one of the police. The latter he was intimate
"Very little to-night, but all he knows. There is another spy
"So much the better. His name?"
"John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself.
registered to-morrow."
night. All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth, walked

"But my dear!" began Defarge.

"It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to
She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe.

"Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug.

little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brains
perquisitions into all the glutinous little glasses near madame, fell

"Hah! Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, black


fingers moved nimbly.
men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,
and her eyes looked at the stranger. "Stay long enough, and I shall knit

"Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so.
not allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but,


"You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned the keeper of the wine-shop.
and anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard."
The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconscious
in its miserable inhabitants."
"Yes, indeed. When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic,
monsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of the bank of
"You don't hear much about them now?" said the spy.
"Perfectly so, madame," replied the spy. "She is going to be married."
He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made the best
Mr. Charles Darnay. D'Aulnais is the name of his mother's family."
paid for what he had drunk, and took his leave: taking occasion to say,



shortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.
jaws and the digestive apparatus: if the bony fingers had been still,
grand woman!"
knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closing in around

"You are happy, my dear father?"
"And I am very happy to-night, dear father. I am deeply happy in the
upon his breast. In the moonlight which is always sad, as the light of
scarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling! More than that," he
wasted--"
"If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quite happy

my prison-walls. I have looked at her, in a state so dull and lethargic,
cheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over.

"My father! Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughter who
have touched me in a different way--have affected me with something as
"No. That was another thing. It stood before my disturbed sense of

"And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais, "and

There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was even to

then, leaned over him, and looked at him.
sorrows deserved. Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lips once

"And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride,
"Really? Well; but don't cry," said the gentle Mr. Lorry.
Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after the box came, till

were put in your cradle."
fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts, even Tellson's
well-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the bright
wind.
dark obscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets. They returned home to
And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, and she was
He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have been
presently. Then, we will take him a ride into the country, and dine
Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear. "O me, O me! All is

shoe of the old size and shape. He took up another that was lying by

seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as though he were
called away professionally, and referring to an imaginary letter of
being thereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch him
fallen, or was falling. He remained, therefore, in his seat near the
"Will you go out?"
Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in the dusk,

friendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he
"Yes; for a walk with me. Why not?"
The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth. Five days, six days,

into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when it was dark

corresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there?
had occurred. If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind, Mr.
So far as it was possible to comprehend him without overstepping those
Doctor were left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:


are no other means of getting at it. It is the case of a shock from

originally?"

and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters. I do not
"But I don't know how to originate, in such a case. If your sagacity,
"that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, was not quite

attack?"

great hope. As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him so soon, I
"There are two other points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxious to


"I do not think so. I do not think," said Doctor Manette with the
confidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personal
will call--Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work. We will say, to put a
his friend. "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"
"it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings
find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror, like that which one may
with it? In short, is it not a concession to the misgiving, to keep the
sacrifice it. I only want your authority. I am sure it does no good.
Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended. They
carrying a light. There, with closed doors, and in a mysterious and
crime.
offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton. They had not been at home
"We are already friends, I hope."
in my own mind, than to convey to yours. However, let me try. You
preach."
"I forgot it long ago."
Heaven, what was there to dismiss! Have I had nothing more important to


doubt if I should abuse the permission. It is a hundred to one if I


to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night."
cheek, and his other hand against the heart that beat for him!

"My husband, it is so. I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there is
we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!"
have parted from his lips for the first time--

dimmed. For, there was something coming in the echoes, something light,
advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet and the sound of
their lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in the
smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both, and to
murmur--like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore--as
all true echoes for ages and ages.

property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining about them
training of the young gentlemen, by directing them to beware of the
off to some suitably retired spot, and there hanged out of the way.
in her ears, of the many times her father had told her that he found her
little Lucie's sixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound,
I should have to pass the night at Tellson's. We have been so full of
there is in it. People are so unreasonable! Some of us at Tellson's are

"I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind. I am not fit to be
"That's right; all safe and well! I don't know why anything should be

struggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind:
could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves with bleeding hands to
thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to arm
and a cruel knife.
With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had been shaped
wine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours.
the men when the place is taken!" And to her, with a shrill thirsty
furious sounding of the living sea; but, still the deep ditch, and the





"Pass this way, then."
occasionally, some partial shouts of tumult broke and leaped into the
tower, they were alone. Hemmed in here by the massive thickness of walls


a calendar on this stone. What is that in your hand? A crowbar? Give it
light higher, you!"
"Nothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?"
of hearing as they came down, until they were in the raging flood once

long-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to him
the lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for a new
But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expression was
faces, rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped
and keep these feet far out of her life! For, they are headlong, mad,


The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with the experience that

around him! "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again. "Listen to him!"

"Not dead! He feared us so much--and with reason--that he caused himself
A moment of profound silence followed. Defarge and his wife looked
house, rousing the women.
Foulon taken, my daughter! Then, a score of others ran into the midst of
Foulon to pieces, and dig him into the ground, that grass may grow from
such a force of suction, that within a quarter of an hour there was not
"See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife. "See the old villain bound
expressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness, at
him!

might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly looked at him
and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, on hearing when
wailing and breadless. Then, the miserable bakers' shops were beset by
most other sauce to wretched bread. Yet, human fellowship infused

was seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men and women in Saint
There was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and where
Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was as
things to this. Strange that Creation, designed expressly for
it. For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed it and wrung
dust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and
highways, dank with the marshy moisture of many low grounds, sprinkled
intelligible:
"No dinner?"

"Here."

"At sunset."
was fast asleep directly.
beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, and the sullen
drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so much air as against
to go down into the village, roused him.
according to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain,
chimneys at the darkening faces by the fountain below, and sent word to
stairs, and shook the curtains of the bed where the last Marquis
picking out transparent places, and showing where balustrades, arches,
impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there was none. The
timely aid! Help, help!" The officers looked towards the soldiers who
Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitation on
two dints in the nose became obscured: anon struggled out of the smoke
splits branched out in the solid walls, like crystallisation; stupefied
of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in those latter
Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with the
while.
The altitude of the gallows that would turn to water and quench it,

feet. For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the footsteps of
ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur, after
outermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, was
without a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be.
time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange; and this
hour or so of the time of closing.
"My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "you touch
these years, who ought to be?"
thought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passed through

might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Paris is not set


bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am used to him.
live at my ease. Time enough, then, to think about growing old."
millions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources that

the house had not been like itself since I had left it.
sweet-tempered. You have such a gentle nature, and you are always
me--even when I come to fall in love in earnest.'
Agnes laughed again, and shook her head.



'By Uriah,' said Agnes.
a moment she had met her father at the door of the room, and was hanging

I shall relinquish all my young people in another six months, and lead a
'And to take care,' said Mr. Wickfield, 'that you're not imposed on, eh?
suggested to his thoughts.
his spirit, not his constitution, that he ventured on so boldly. Annie,
Mr. Wickfield.
out!'
'Annie, my dear,' returned her mother, 'once for all, I must really beg

sooner than he'll overturn the Doctor's plans.'
tell the Doctor it was like himself, and go several times through that
by his own daughter's side. It appeared to me that he never thought of
of returning home for a time, as the only hope of restoration." That's
Do you call that confidence, my love, towards Doctor Strong? I am
stupid I am! "Doctor," of course. Ah! amiable indeed!' Here she left
the letter, 'it would be insupportable to me to think of.'
expression, and so did Mrs. Strong. They sang together, and played duets
natural grace and charm of her manner; and when I looked at Agnes by her
cancelled, and I were still standing in the doorway on the night of the
to him, and with resentment against those who injured him. The impending

I got away from Agnes and her father, somehow, with an indifferent show
was to appear as old as possible to the coachman, and to speak extremely


he's a good un, is worth his weight in gold. Did you ever breed any
brim, and whose close-fitting drab trousers seemed to button all the way
'Bred them Suffolk Punches by wholesale?'
I construed this remark into an indication of a wish that he should have
distinguished eminence; had glorified myself upon it a good deal; and
coach. It was in vain to take refuge in gruffness of speech. I spoke
I felt as if the tinker's blackened hand were in the bosom of my shirt
We went to the Golden Cross at Charing Cross, then a mouldy sort of
like for dinner? Young gentlemen likes poultry in general: have a fowl!'

He soon came back to say that there were none (at which I was much
thought it flat; and it certainly had more English crumbs in it, than
taskmasters they had been at school, was a most novel and delightful
I had emerged by another door, and stood in the street for a little
life moving along--that I don't know when the figure of a handsome
and saw him plainly. I turned directly, came back, and looked again. He

I grasped him by both hands, and could not let them go. But for very

education there. How do YOU come to be here, Steerforth?'
and said gaily:



The waiter immediately withdrew to make the exchange. Steerforth, very
Rome, Steerforth, and friendship, until the early morning coaches,
me that my shaving-water was outside, I felt severely the having no
in a drizzling rain and a dark-brown fog, until I was admonished by the
all respects (age included); but his easy patronage soon put that to
he had still this interest in me, I told him how my aunt had proposed



have not the least desire or intention to distinguish myself in that

a handsome face, was in the doorway as we alighted; and greeting
coming and going on the walls, as the newly-kindled fire crackled and
discoloured, and had healed years ago--which had once cut through her
She was introduced as Miss Dartle, and both Steerforth and his mother
on all hands understood to be--eh?' 'It is education for a very grave
hear it! Now, I know what to do! That's the advantage of asking. I shall

was said to which she was opposed, Miss Dartle insinuated in the same
he?'
a journey with you, Daisy), to see that sort of people together, and to
'Are they what? And are who what?' said Steerforth.
they have not very fine natures, and they may be thankful that, like

past. She has worn herself away by constant sharpening. She is all

thousand pounds of her own, and saves the interest of it every year, to
features cleared off as he said this merrily, and he was his own frank,
storm of rage; and then I saw it start forth like the old writing on the
have been very glad to hear them too, if he had not interposed, and
'He was very generous and noble to me in those days, I assure you,
'It was not a fit school generally for my son,' said she; 'far from it;

in which he can always, when it is his pleasure, outstrip every
Miss Dartle played backgammon as eagerly as she did everything else.
seriously think of going down into the country with me. There was no

and footstools, worked by his mother's hand, and with no sort of thing
when I found a likeness of Miss Dartle looking eagerly at me from above
of quartering her on me. To get rid of her, I undressed quickly,

to it at the sides, a soft way of speaking, with a peculiar habit of
man. And of this, I noticed--the women-servants in the household were

of respectability, unaffected by the east wind of January, and not

nine.'
never any less: and yet, invariably, however far I might have been
me a novice in these sciences, but I never could bear to show my want of
The week passed away in a most delightful manner. It passed rapidly, as
all, it was a familiar, unrestrained, affectionate demeanour that he
intended to defy the shocks of ages, and received my modestly proffered
so concerned, I recollect, even for the honour of Yarmouth, that when
out of the chimney; and had had a great mind, he told me, to walk in and
'So be it!' returned Steerforth. 'This evening.'
'Aha! What! you recollect my skirmishes with Rosa, do you?' he exclaimed
I answered, laughing, that I thought we might get through it in that
out alone. There was a sharp bracing air; the ground was dry; the sea
be; but the inscription, DRAPER, TAILOR, HABERDASHER, FUNERAL FURNISHER,
if it had never left off.
skirts, to her great admiration. I heard a heavy puffing and blowing
remember when. Are you sure it was me?'

Blunderstone it was, of course. Dear me! And how have you been since?'
smallest child on the counter.
dancing on the counter.
'Let me see,' said Mr. Omer. 'Barkis's the carrier's wife--Peggotty's
touch her.'
'My dear,' said Mr. Omer, 'I don't say it's the case with you,' winking
couldn't do, that she shouldn't do--especially on the subject of another
was obliged to sit on the stool of the shop-desk.

down. No more than that was ever said against her, Minnie?'
'Yes, father,' replied Minnie. 'Never say I detracted from her!'
inquiry if I might peep in, was answered with a free permission; and,
The tune across the yard that seemed as if it never had left off--alas!
be timed accordingly; and taking leave of Mr. Omer, and his pretty
her.

'Peggotty!' I cried to her.
life, I dare say--not even to her--more freely than I did that morning.
her; and having waited outside for a minute, while she said a word of
object I ever beheld.


'A very poor man, indeed I am,' said Mr. Barkis.
'Old clothes,' said Mr. Barkis.

my honour, but that I saw Peggotty, on the opposite side of the bed,
producing a single coin from his store; and that he endured unheard-of
having preserved the impenetrable secret of the box, appeared to be a
in anybody's heart; bound her to him wholly in five minutes. His
impossibility of doing anything else, or doing anything better, which
hesitating, he was possessed of the whole case.

worthless to him, and next minute thrown away--I say, if anyone had told

close to me, went in.
of bashfulness that sat upon him very well, held little Em'ly by
The little picture was so instantaneously dissolved by our going in,
us, that he did not know what to say or do, but kept over and over again
you, along with Mas'r Davy, on the brightest night of your uncle's life

here his delight broke out again, 'and has made off. Would you be so
Steerforth only nodded; but with such a pleased expression of interest,
house, what I suppose (I'm a ignorant man, but that's my belief) no one
will be, to my loving art. I am rough, sir,' said Mr. Peggotty, 'I am as
a young gal, when a woman. Not much of a person to look at, he warn't,'
of his to our little Em'ly. He follers her about, he makes hisself a
man ashore there, iron-true to my little Em'ly, God bless her, and no
much. Oh, Uncle! I never can have him. He's such a good fellow!" I gives
stages of his narrative, now resumed all its former triumphant delight,
This is to be my little wife!" And she says, half bold and half shy, and

me--gent'lmen--than--she's all to me that ever I can want, and more
by the story altogether. How far my emotions were influenced by the
minutes we were all as easy and as happy as it was possible to be.
So Mr. Peggotty went into my old room to fetch little Em'ly. At first
without any reserve.
(Steerforth too), in irresistible sympathy with what was so pleasant and
miserable, that she said next day she thought she must have been
time, and all the evening, on the old locker in her old little corner
stood crowded round the door to light us as far as they could upon our
their happiness in that intended marriage! I never saw people so happy.

in earnest, and are good. I wish we all were!' Next moment he was
country. We were very much together, I need not say; but occasionally we
and of his being afloat, wrapped in fishermen's clothes, whole moonlight
naturally no great interest in going there again. Hence, on three or
done, and lingered among them as my younger thoughts had lingered when I
me. My reflections at these times were always associated with the figure
lunatic gentleman, and the people who took care of him. He was always
raw-boned, high-nosed wife; and they had a weazen little baby, with a
went to my neat room at night; and, turning over the leaves of the
a hundred yards out of my track, I always looked in as I went by.
been if he had been less absorbed, for footsteps fell noiselessly on the
'I was obliged to announce myself, somehow,' I replied. 'Have I called
with a piece of burning wood, striking out of it a train of red-hot
room, 'thinking that all the people we found so glad on the night of
There was a passionate dejection in his manner that quite amazed me. He
observe him in silence, as he stood leaning his head upon his hand, and
times, nursery tales come up into the memory, unrecognized for what
tell you, my good fellow, once more, that it would have been well for me
feast with most admired disorder, Daisy.'
needed, against Mr. Peggotty's return with the tide; and had left the
'And so,' he said, gaily, 'we abandon this buccaneer life tomorrow, do
'As long as the novelty should last,' said I, laughing.

the art of binding myself to any of the wheels on which the Ixions of
all events,' walking me briskly on, 'I have bought a boat that was for
'Tush!' he answered, turning red. 'The less said, the better.'
of it, I only pursued it in my thoughts as we went on at even a quicker


As he had continued to look steadily at me, I took it as a reminder that
ingenuity in that handicraft, until he had become a skilled workman. He
passed on, after we had exchanged a few words, she did not like to
have given all that to the wind which was blowing, and to have nothing

did it come from, I wonder!'
expressions, several times, in the short remainder of our walk; and only


I was obliged to confess--I felt ashamed, even of being at this
subject. I remained, therefore, in a state of considerable expectation
a sofa which stood between me and it, a pursy dwarf, of about forty
generally do, in a pair of feet, she was so short that she stood at a
do so far away from home? Up to mischief, I'll be bound. Oh, you're a
back the strings, and sat down, panting, on a footstool in front of

obliged to ring the bell. Ha! ha! ha! He's a pleasant wretch, but he
darling--when I tell you! Do you know what my great grandfather's name
to what was said to her, or when waiting for an answer to what she had
she tumbled in a heap upon the chair. From this employment she suddenly
sat. 'Quite tempting! I'm very fond of peaches. Happy to make your
This was addressed confidentially to both of us, as the morsel of a
turned topsy-turvy, I call him, for his name's got all the letters in
'Pays, as he speaks, my dear child--through the nose,' replied Miss
inquired Steerforth.
the men call it when they make speeches in Parliament) is a system of
have it over.'

his laughing face towards me, and submitted his head to her inspection,

'A little,' said Steerforth.
perfumer's shop, and wants to buy a bottle of the Madagascar Liquid.'
shop--elderly female--quite a Griffin--who had never even heard of it

such a face, that they'd as soon think of laying it on, before a whole
'Ah!' she said. 'Such things are not much in demand hereabouts. That

were confident of its appearing presently.
shame! Did he sip every flower, and change every hour, until Polly his

to guess at. She is at present apprenticed, Miss Mowcher, or articled,
add, that to me she seems to be throwing herself away; that I am sure
round his head in all directions. 'Very well: very well! Quite a long



she held up before one eye to enforce her persuasions, said we would
I replied politely: 'Not at all.' But I thought she was rather so, when
your hearts, but I am forced to leave you. You must call up all your
this offer, and, with her finger on her nose, departed.
and there, and everywhere, was true enough; for she made little darts
She was the principal theme of our conversation during the evening:
she's talking to some 'un in here.'
When I heard these words, a light began to fall upon the figure I had
that I know'd then, she was theer, sir, but along of her creeping soon
'I recollect her now!' cried I, recalling one of the two girls I had
towards me. I was once like you!" She wanted to speak to Em'ly. Em'ly
to her out o' winder to bring here. "Show that," she says, "to my aunt,
'And if I could deny her when the tears was on her face, Mas'r Davy,'
but she came after me, entreating me to come in too. Even then, I
lying on her lap. I saw but little of the girl's face, over which her

'What will she do there?' inquired Ham.
Peggotty shook her head compassionately.
retired near me, and showed it to him.
and kissed it.

'No! no! no!' cried little Em'ly, sobbing, and shaking her head. 'I am
you. I am happy, all day long, in the thoughts of you.'

for the sake of old times, do, please, try to help me! I want to be a
been), wept silently, while my old nurse hushed her like an infant.
I saw her do, that night, what I had never seen her do before. I saw her

what she had been unable to repress when her heart lay open to me by an
For the present we had enough to do, in taking leave of all our friends.
and left a great many people very sorry behind US.
'That I am sure he will,' said I.
happen to me or them in the meanwhile. At length Steerforth, becoming

Steerforth. 'Look to the right, and you'll see a flat country, with a
'Why, yes,' said I. 'She asks me, here, if I think I should like to be a

nothing about, and the other fourth supposes to have been dug up, in
same Doctors' Commons. You shall go there one day, and find them
else, change and change about; but it's always a very pleasant,
very comfortable fees, and altogether they make a mighty snug little
had occurred to her, on her lately visiting her own proctor in Doctors'
taken lodgings for a week at a kind of private hotel at Lincoln's Inn
drove to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where I found my aunt up, and waiting

donkeys off. I am confident he wants strength of purpose. I ought to
tail which that Murdering sister of a woman rode, when she came to my

hope the steak may be beef, but I don't believe it. Nothing's genuine in
which it greatly satisfied her to see me do. When the table was cleared,
in it, one by one, before eating them; and looking benignantly on me,
'Come!' said my aunt. 'That's cheering!'
'It will cost,' returned my aunt, 'to article you, just a thousand
Are you certain that you can afford to part with so much money, and that
your being a good, a sensible, and a happy man. I am bent upon it--so is
child your mother, even after your sister Betsey Trotwood disappointed

We had a long chat by the fire before we went to bed. I slept in a room
gave me her purse to carry for her, which had ten guineas in it and some
coming so close after us as to brush against her.

get me a coach, my dear, and wait for me in St. Paul's Churchyard.'

What Mr. Dick had told me, and what I had supposed to be a delusion of
chariot, and to tell the coachman to drive slowly up and down a little
and narrow ways brought us to the sky-lighted offices of Spenlow and
As we were left to look about us while Mr. Spenlow was fetched, I
them all. Besides these, there were sundry immense manuscript Books
He was a little light-haired gentleman, with undeniable boots, and the

nephew, I believe, I have now the pleasure of'--Punch again. I bowed my
propose a month--an initiatory month. I should be happy, myself, to
Mr. Jorkins's opinions. Mr. Jorkins thinks a thousand pounds too little,
his cravat to shake it, and answered, anticipating the word 'salary':
If a clerk wanted his salary raised, Mr. Jorkins wouldn't listen to such
pleased, and that my aunt need neither remain in town nor return at
Mr. Spenlow conducted me through a paved courtyard formed of grave brick
him in an aviary, I should certainly have taken for an owl, but who, I
man secretly eating crumbs out of his coat pockets, was warming itself

plans, when we were safely housed; and as I knew she was anxious to
advertisement, carefully cut out of a newspaper, setting forth that in
'Then come,' replied my aunt, immediately resuming the bonnet she had a
'Let us see these chambers of yours, if you please, ma'am,' said my
So we went upstairs.
the pantry to discuss the terms, while I remained on the sitting-room
'What's become of him?' asked my aunt.

In short, my aunt, seeing how enraptured I was with the premises, took
was all I wanted. She repeated this several times next day, in the
that when the coach was gone, I turned my face to the Adelphi, pondering
to feel, when I shut my outer door, like Robinson Crusoe, when he had


of him, that I felt quite jealous of his Oxford friends.
natural to me, that I felt myself falling a little in love with her. I
'My dear Steerforth,' cried I, 'I began to think I should never see you
me notice to quit.'
with one of these fellows who is at the Piazza Hotel, in Covent Garden.'


the expense of this young female? and Mrs. Crupp said she supposed
declined, and said, 'Never mind fish.' But Mrs. Crupp said, Don't say
I acted on Mrs. Crupp's opinion, and gave the order at the pastry-cook's
Covent Garden Market, and gave a rather extensive order at a retail
indefinitely, as 'a man', and seldom or never in the first person

for my chair was opposite the door, and my attention was distracted by
deal of destruction.
half-forgotten things to talk about, came rushing into my mind, and made
starting up with a corkscrew to open more wine, long before any was
'Steerforth--you'retheguidingstarofmyexistence.'
said a man was not to be dictated to. I said a man was. He said a man
tomorrow, and the day after--each day at five o'clock, that we might
looking-glass. That was I too. I was very pale in the looking-glass;

There was an indistinct talk of its being wet. I considered it frosty.
were very high up in a very hot theatre, looking down into a large pit,
On somebody's motion, we resolved to go downstairs to the dress-boxes,

'Agnes!' I said. 'I'mafraidyou'renorwell.'
her downstairs. I suppose I expressed it, somehow; for after she had
'Good night!') got up and went away. They followed, and I stepped at
were a hard board; my tongue the bottom of an empty kettle, furred with
the very sight of the room where the revel had been held--my racking
of yesterday's feast, and I was really inclined to fall upon her nankeen
I was going out at my door on the morning after that deplorable day of
'T. Copperfield, Esquire,' said the ticket-porter, touching his hat with
resolve to break the seal.
thought, unless he thought I was learning to write. I must have written
could I say of it that would be higher praise than that? I will come at
time was exceeded by a full quarter of an hour, according to the
She looked so quiet and good, and reminded me so strongly of my airy

She smiled rather sadly, I thought, and shook her head.
'On warning you,' said Agnes, with a steady glance, 'against your bad
'I do not judge him from what I saw of you the other night,' she quietly
There was always something in her modest voice that seemed to touch a
in what it is engendered, Trotwood,--in how true a remembrance of our
'I am not so unreasonable as to expect,' said Agnes, resuming her usual
justice, and to like him as well as I do.'
'When I recall it,' said Agnes.
soon as I had concluded, 'that you are always to tell me, not only when
Dartle--but I don't adore her.'

hers:
Still looking at me, Agnes shook her head while I was speaking, with a
'Forced upon him, Agnes! Who forces it upon him?'
had long been going on to this, I was sensible: yes, I could not but

'I did, Trotwood,' she replied, 'what I hope was right. Feeling sure
out for my sake, and how his anxious thoughts of me have shadowed his
helpless manner, 'Pray, Agnes, don't! Don't, my dear sister!'
friendly to Uriah. Don't repel him. Don't resent (as I think you have a
appeared to remember me perfectly, and still to suspect me of being in a
call on Uriah in the office as I went out, and leaving a card for him in
cowards of us both.
Mrs. Henry Spiker was this lady's name; and her husband was there
condescension. I could have wished he had been less obliged to me, for


'If it's really the same person,' said I, glancing towards him, 'it
should be here at all: as Traddles was only invited this morning, when
bar. Yes. He is quite a good fellow--nobody's enemy but his own.'
am able to throw something in Traddles's way, in the course of the year;
people down in the trenches.
satisfaction and self-abasement, that I could gladly have pitched
had something to do at second-hand (at least, Mr. Gulpidge had) with
sanguine complexion.
should call bow down before idols. Positively Idols! Before service,
board with an imbecile smile, 'we can't forego Blood, you know. We must
gave the utmost satisfaction, and brought the gentleman into great
'Do you mean the D. of A.'s?' said Mr. Spiker.



turn and turn about. All this time we, the outsiders, remained oppressed
interested to hear that I knew Steerforth, and spoke of him with such
reminder to me of my happy life in the grave old house she had made so
Uriah, whom I don't include in that denomination, and who had never
'Oh, really, Master Copperfield,' he rejoined--'I beg your pardon,

prevailed, however, and I conducted him to my fireside. When I lighted
Uriah, 'to see you waiting upon me is what I never could have expected!
scorched their lashes off, turned towards me without looking at me, the
'Yes,' said I, 'something.'
'What a prophet you have shown yourself, Mister Copperfield!' pursued
didn't myself. I recollect saying with my own lips that I was much too

'No,' said I, drily.
his request, preferred in quite another tone of voice, I did the honours
again, but he left the renewal of the conversation to me.

It's a topic that I wouldn't touch upon, to any soul but you. Even to

it, as if he were shaving himself.
'Thank you, Master Copperfield! I have risen from my umble station since


first moment I had the pleasure of beholding you in a pony-shay) has
seemed full of the echoes of his voice; and the strange feeling (to

I fathomed the depth of the rascal's whole scheme, and understood why he
resign, to call her mine!" I hope to do it, one of these days.'
it would be quite convenient. So I shall have time gradually to make her
confidence of old times, Master Copperfield, that it's almost half past


in inducing him to accept my bedroom, I was obliged to make the best
and tumbled; how I wearied myself with thinking about Agnes and this

could not help wandering in and out every half-hour or so, and taking

like a small tent, on the edge of the back seat on the roof, while
was necessary for papa's peace that the sacrifice should be made, I
sordid baseness of his, the greatest danger lay. All this, doubtless, he

very much alone. I believe I had at this time some lurking distrust of
for twelve months certain: and though I still found them dreary of an
given to record that circumstance in fragments of English versification.
on account of the expected return of his daughter from finishing her

sherry there, of a quality so precious as to make a man wink. We had
The phaeton was a very handsome affair; the horses arched their necks
reference to my profession. He said it was the genteelest profession in
I asked Mr. Spenlow what he considered the best sort of professional
into a general eulogium on the Commons. What was to be particularly
Consistory judge could plead any court-day as an advocate. Well, you
solemnly, in conclusion; but when the price of wheat per bushel had been
got the better of that bushel of wheat. It has reappeared to annihilate
and we talked about The Stranger and the Drama, and the pairs of horses,

but I didn't know it, and I didn't care whose it was. All was over in a
'I,' observed a well-remembered voice, when I had bowed and murmured
brother is robust, I am obliged to you.'
his childish days. Circumstances have separated us since. I should not
A passing thought occurred to me that Miss Murdstone, like the pocket
in that state of love, was a little too ridiculous. I could only sit
of him.
I don't remember who was there, except Dora. I have not the least idea
apprehension that Miss Murdstone would disparage me to her. The amiable

'Far from it,' assented Miss Murdstone. 'I do not wish to revive


other the subject of remark. Do you approve of this?'
her neck; which seemed to be the same set, in exactly the same state,
refreshment. That my soul recoiled from punch particularly. That when
tenderly, for I loved even him; but he showed his whole set of teeth,
yet mindful of me, seemed to me the summit of human ambition--I am
'You--are--out early, Miss Spenlow,' said I.
was very bright to me then, though it had been very dark to me a minute


curls again, when the little dog came running along the walk to our
dimpled chin upon his head!--and we walked away to look at a greenhouse.
papa can have been about, when he chose such a vexatious thing to be my
and to find out our own friends, instead of having them found out for
we'll make ourselves as happy as we can in spite of her, and we'll tease
and I stopped to admire the same one, and Dora, laughing, held the dog
powder, to Dora to be kissed. Then she took Dora's arm in hers, and

We departed early in the morning, for we had a Salvage case coming on in
in my mind, as I listened to it; how I saw 'DORA' engraved upon the
I don't mean the dreams that I dreamed on that day alone, but day after
Dora--and took to wearing straw-coloured kid gloves in the streets, and
the best shops for ladies were, I haunted the Bazaar like an unquiet

cloves, which was the best remedy for her complaint;--or, if I had not

encouragement. 'Never say die, sir! If She don't smile upon you,

I could care for. "Thank Ev'in!" were the expression, "I have now found
the young gentleman has his original character formed. But let him go to
'Mrs. Crupp,' said I, 'I must beg you not to connect the young lady in


lived in that direction informed me, by gentlemen students, who bought
on account of the cabbage-leaves. The refuse was not wholly vegetable
who was learning to make houses, and had not yet got out of his cramped

As to his dealing in the mild article of milk, by the by, there never

shriek.
servant echoed it. Upon this, I walked in, and in pursuance of the
sofa-bedstead in it, and his blacking-brushes and blacking were among
put flies in; and to comfort himself under ill usage, with the memorable
indeed to see you. It was because I was thoroughly glad to see you when
His old simple character and good temper, and something of his old
'You are reading for the bar, Mr. Waterbrook informed me?' said I.


'Do you think so?' returned Traddles. 'Really? Perhaps he was rather.

what he expected, and so he married his housekeeper.'

'It don't matter,' said Traddles. 'I began, by means of his assistance,
(glancing at his table), 'I am at work for him at this minute. I am not
'So, by little and little, and not living high, I managed to scrape up
Engaged! Oh, Dora!
present itself to me until afterwards; for my selfish thoughts were
can mention--for me!'
falling a little back from it to survey it with the greater admiration,
it's something. The table-cloths, and pillow-cases, and articles of
make much, but I don't spend much. In general, I board with the people

'I beg your pardon, Mr. Traddles,' said Mr. Micawber, with the old roll
quo.'

while Traddles looked (with reason) not a little amazed at this

of Mrs. Micawber washing her hands, and hurriedly opening and shutting
before making what I trust I shall not be accused of presumption in
'My dear,' said Mr. Micawber, leading her towards me, 'here is
half-an-hour's talk, all together; and I asked her about the twins,
to forego it.
anxious (he explained to me) to say a few words to an old friend, in
am at present, my dear Copperfield, engaged in the sale of corn upon
pledges of affection which--in short, to the infantine group. Mrs.
CHAPTER 28. Mr. MICAWBER'S GAUNTLET
founded on the acute experience acquired at this period of my life,
fish and joint, and said, with a dignified sense of injury, 'No! No,
If I hesitated, she was taken with that wonderful disorder which was
wounded sensibility was enough to make me falter an apology. In short,
withdraw to the landing-place, beyond the outer door; where a habit of
composure.

desire to answer for others. I am too well aware that when, in the
and tried friend Copperfield will, I am sure, forgive, the momentary
To divert his thoughts from this melancholy subject, I informed Mr.
or the lavender-water, or the pins, or the fire, or the wax-candles, but
appearance of the gravy, forasmuch as the 'young gal' had dropped it all
'My dear friend Copperfield,' said Mr. Micawber, 'accidents will occur

done to begin upon, we fell-to, with our sleeves still tucked up at the
record it, but I really believe I forgot Dora for a little while. I am
staid Littimer, standing hat in hand before me.

'I beg, sir,' he returned respectfully, 'that you will be seated, and
if he had stabbed himself. Mrs. Micawber put on her brown gloves, and
he noiselessly removed them, and set on the cheese. He took that off,
I thanked him and said, No; but would he take no dinner himself?
'I should imagine that he might be here tomorrow, sir. I rather thought
'Indeed, sir!' and he divided a bow between me and Traddles, with a
'Did you remain long at Yarmouth, that time?'
'Mr. Steerforth has not seen it yet, I suppose?'
conscience had embarrassed me with whispers that I had mistrusted his
infinite condescension.
Copperfield and myself were younger, and fought our way in the world
a pull at them, if it had been feasible.'
so it was a glassful.

Mr. Micawber, leaning back in his chair with his hands in his pockets,
is, I am convinced, a certainty.'
I know from my own knowledge of him, is calculated to shine; and the
manners peculiarly qualify him for the Banking business. I may argue
Micawber's hands--which they don't--what is the use of that? Again I

themselves. We must, in a measure, assist to turn them up. I may be
'Pray, my dear, allow me to conclude. Here is Mr. Micawber, with a
forcibly, 'that what Mr. Micawber has to do, is to throw down the
all the papers; to describe himself plainly as so-and-so, with such and

Traddles, too, who was looking at the fire.
Mr. Micawber should go into the City, should take that bill into the
Traddles, who took his tone from me, did likewise, still looking at the
when Mr. Micawber should exert himself and--I will add--assert himself,
With these words, and resisting our entreaties that she would grace
was aware of. He then returned to the punch, in the highest state of

dearest girl!--'
that he ran with a glass of punch into my bedroom, in order that Mrs.
which he had always had his eye, but which he did not expect to attain
knife and fork for me. We acknowledged his kindness; and he begged us
something of that kind; which I think I liked. After tea, we discussed a
that woman or perish in the attempt.

thoughtful look.
of that one. I have been thinking that he will most likely propose that
But I was much afraid, when I observed the good-natured manner in which


the cordiality I felt, 'that I had hardly breath to greet you with,
'All of whom I met in the street, talking loud in your praise,' returned



understood him that you were at Oxford; though, now I think of it, he
'Have you been there long?'

'Yes!' still feeling in his pockets, and looking over their contents:
'That's right!'
While I deciphered it, Steerforth continued to eat and drink.

that he took--such as this buffeting of rough seas, and braving of hard
'Then I tell you what, Steerforth. I think I will go down and see my

'Yes, I think so.'
holding me as before, and giving me a shake:

I was undressing in my own room, when Mr. Micawber's letter tumbled on
'It is expedient that I should inform you that the undersigned is
belonging to the undersigned, as yearly tenant of this habitation, but
will, in the course of nature, be increased by the sum of one more
                         'Head
or any age that could be mentioned.
no difficulty about it. I took that opportunity, with my voice sticking
case in court that morning, which was called The office of the judge

between the two. So surely as I looked towards her, did I see that eager
All day, she seemed to pervade the whole house. If I talked to
profession really so engaging and interesting as to absorb your whole
'Well,' I replied; 'perhaps it was a little dry.'
'Don't it--I don't say that it does, mind I want to know--don't it
want to found an opinion on what you tell me. Then, it's not so? Well! I



hand so thin and delicate, that when I had seen her hold it up before
impetuous in him was softened by age and sex, in her, to a gracious
'Oh, but do tell me, though, somebody, because I have been thinking

'I am sure you are right,' she returned; 'and so it is that bad habits
'You cannot learn frankness, Rosa,' said Mrs. Steerforth quickly--for

'Thank you:--whether people, who are like each other in their moral

One other little circumstance connected with Miss Dartle I must
I saw her look at him with growing admiration; I saw her try, more and
we did not remain in the dining-room more than five minutes after her


left his seat, and gone to her, and had put his arm laughingly about

expression, and asked if he could guess what it was that she had taken

'Daisy, if anything should ever separate us, you must think of me at my
of Agnes, but for my uncertainty how to approach the subject with no
wondered that nothing troubled his repose, as I looked at him. But he

of Mr. Omer inside, smoking his pipe by the parlour door, I entered, and
for the asthma.'
'Do you know how he is tonight?' I asked.
'Yes, yes, you understand,' said Mr. Omer, nodding his head. 'We dursn't
Barkis a year, to move to as he went by, I have known him forty years.
a grandfather,' said Mr. Omer.

by which this troublesome breath of mine gets into action. But, Lord
how little Emily was?
prettier. It ain't that she don't work as well as ever, for she does.
apprehension seemed to please him, and he went on: 'Now I consider this

my heart, in what he said.
 For--don't you see,' said Mr. Omer, touching me with his pipe, 'it ain't
'Oh yes,' I replied. 'I know him well.'
it is, there's a postponement.'
'I see,' said I.
Having so favourable an opportunity, it occurred to me to ask Mr. Omer,
Mr. Omer, hearing his daughter's footstep before I heard it, touched me

dwindle into nothing.

to shrink from mine; and then she glided from the chair, and creeping
word.
with your uncle, Moppet? When your husband that'll be so soon, is here

door after him, that it might cause no disturbance of the quiet that
no less pride than before, 'it's my belief she'd go along with him, now!
took to be the cause of her being so unlike herself--and I had leisure,
thing.
beneath him, but the box was there; and the last words he had uttered

ebb at half-arter three, slack water half an hour. If he lives till it

I was on the point of asking him if he knew me, when he tried to stretch

enough at the utmost), I was as grateful, I rejoice to think, as even
since; a silver tobacco-stopper, in the form of a leg; an imitation
never resolved themselves into anything definite.
the interest of one thousand to Mr. Peggotty for his life; on his
Commons than I had supposed. I examined the will with the deepest
married in a fortnight.
about the churchyard for an hour, after all was over; and pulled some
can make it otherwise than as it was.
with Roderick Random's knapsack in the days of yore; and, instead of
which was heavy, brought me to the door, and I went in.
appeared to be fretting a little, in her old corner; and consequently
down, sir. It ain't o' no use saying welcome to you, but you're welcome,
dooty by the departed, and the departed know'd it; and the departed
come nat'ral!'

speech capable of this unfeeling construction, but was prevented from
here at the hour as she's a comin' home, I puts the light in the winder.
and rubbing his hands up and down them in his comfortable satisfaction,
I doen't feel as if the littlest things was her, a'most. I takes 'em up
after some further rubbing of his legs, 'as this is along of my havin'
put the candle in the winder, and sit afore the fire, pretending I'm
for he had a large sou'wester hat on, slouched over his face.

or what I dreaded. I could only look at him.
pray my good and gracious God to kill her (her that is so dear above all
Davy?'
lips quite white, and blood trickling down his bosom (it had sprung from
'"When you, who love me so much better than I ever have deserved, even
the letter bore date on the previous night:
me--don't remember we were ever to be married--but try to think as if I
That was all.


at odd times. There's been a gen'lm'n too. Both of 'em belonged to one
house had been about to fall upon me.

impatiently. 'Bear a hand and help me. Well!' when somebody had done so.
dead, but I'd have drownded him, and thought it right!--I'm a going to
'No, no, Dan'l, not as you are now. Seek her in a little while, my lone
for so many, many year!'

pollution of an honest home, I believed that if I had been brought face

their distress prevailed, which was full of gentleness and delicacy. The
known him. But they were both as grave and steady as the sea itself,
light, and a frightful thought came into my mind--not that his face
if I were going to London tomorrow? I told him I had not gone today,
live along with my sister. The old boat yonder--'


He walked a little in front of us, and kept before us for some minutes.
do you mean?' He had pointed confusedly out to sea.
gone! Mas'r Davy,' he added; answering, as I think, my look; 'you han't
We insensibly approached the old boat, and entered. Mrs. Gummidge, no
When she had served us all, she withdrew to the window, where she
times, and tell me how you fare to feel upon your lone lorn journies.'

would have laboured hard for Mr. Peggotty, and been well paid in being
together, and he having fallen asleep in perfect exhaustion, she broke
It was between nine and ten o'clock when, strolling in a melancholy
'Yes, I do!' cried Mrs. Joram, angrily.
become of her! Oh, how could she be so cruel, to herself and him!'
her head down on the pillow beside her till she was fast asleep! The
and sleepless nights, was at her brother's, where she meant to stay till
a knock at the door. There was a knocker upon the door, but it was not
I might not have been prepared to give the little creature a very kind
