family may be. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs.
once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. Churchill-'Every sacrifice of mere
use!-Nobody but you, Mr. Knightley, would imagine it possible. But you
him more good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the
little minds would bend to his."
have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through.
"Oh, the difference of situation and habit! I wish you would try to
ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in
perfection. I dare say he has; and though it may cut him off from some

considerations? Do you suppose she does not often say all this to
want to think ill of him. I should be as ready to acknowledge his
parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest-one object of
agreeable. To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music;
every body's talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; to

different disposition from himself, was unworthy the real liberality of

was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they
who presumed ever to see imperfection in her, as rather negligent in
resolution of not passing their door without going in-observing, as she
daughter, almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness, thanks
There was intimacy between them, and Mr. Cole had heard from Mr. Elton
having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded by
in, she began inquiring after her, Jane is so very great a favourite
Emma's politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest-
to Mrs. Cole, and since she went away, I was reading it again to my
you, ma'am?-And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make
All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath;

she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice. But it is very

very good of them to send her the whole way! But they always do, you
for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon. My
urgent letter to her mother-or her father, I declare I do not know
their daughter's not walking out often with only Mr. Dixon, for which I
going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of farther
distance from us, for months together-not able to come if any thing was
if he had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her
air, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately."

months at Highbury will entirely cure her-and it is certainly a great
her illness-but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin, and
fancied at first; and I make so light of it now to her, that she does

the street-happy in this, that though much had been forced on her
Jane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs. Bates's youngest
losing her mother, she became the property, the charge, the
Fairfax, as an excellent officer and most deserving young man; and
real friend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of
appointments, was handsome, his fortune was moderate and must be all
attendance of first-rate masters. Her disposition and abilities were
suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this
often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs, giving attraction to
should be the period. With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she
they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted
discharged with tolerable comfort.
recovery of her health, than on any thing else. Certain it was that she
because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which she
These were her reasons-she had no better.
almost every body would think tall, and nobody could think very tall;
of which elegance was the reigning character, and as such, she must, in
was going to sink from, how she was going to live, it seemed impossible
unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, while a sharer of his

exactly how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how
reserved.
Dixon, perhaps, had been very near changing one friend for the other,
of information?"-"At a watering-place, or in a common London



deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. I

"I am disappointed," was his only answer.
agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she had Emma."

pork-but still it is pork-and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure
"That's right, my dear, very right. I had not thought of it before, but
"News! Oh! yes, I always like news. What is it?-why do you smile

"There is my news:-I thought it would interest you," said Mr.
that we had not any salting-pan large enough. So I said I would go down

"Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good to
By his style, I should imagine it just settled."
joyfully; "my mother is so pleased!-she says she cannot bear to have

excellent young woman. His extreme attention to my mother-wanting her
happier or a better couple than Mr. and Mrs. Perry. I say, sir,"

"When I have seen Mr. Elton," replied Jane, "I dare say I shall be
short, I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of
"Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all."
and that you yourself-"
Cole's; but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better
Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while
detaining her at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the intelligence would
to tell. "She had set out from Mrs. Goddard's half an hour ago-she had
fashion in the place.-"And so, there she had set, without an idea of
must have been as white as my gown. I could not go away you know,
be very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but
got three yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I
talk to me and make me comfortable again."
by it. Of course, he must be sorry to lose her-they must be all sorry.
"It might be distressing, for the moment," said she; "but you seem to
or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet-such a


A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first mentioned in
appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the right
fortune, of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
easily impressed-so sweetly disposed-had in short, to use a most

pretension, now spread over his air. She was, in fact, beginning very
certainly be lessened by his marriage. Many vain solicitudes would be
his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing. On
heart of Bristol; for though the father and mother had died some years
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! She had
every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss
regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him, and her
as a check to the other. Mr. Elton's engagement had been the cure of
Martins were forgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off for
After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than
which her own heart could not approve-something of ingratitude, merely
friend called for her at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil stars had led her to
had given her so much pleasure the autumn before, was beginning to
gravel walk-a Miss Martin just appearing at the door, and parting with
grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and a warmer manner.
be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six
it. Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Elton and the Martins. The
murmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both-such being
Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would be
not less to the purpose. To know that _she_ thought his coming certain
listened, and smiled, and congratulated.
"Well, well, I am ready;"-and turning again to Emma, "but you must not
Weston's parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety, and meant only



much had been said in his praise; he was a _very_ good looking young
earlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half a day.
man, "though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;
one's _own_ country gives, and the greatest curiosity to visit it. That
neighbourhood?-Highbury, perhaps, afforded society enough?-There were
additional proof of his knowing how to please-and of his certainly
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor's merits,
very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age; I did not know that
gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. Weston I should understand whom I

every marriage that was arranged, he never suffered beforehand from the
however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till
may as well be paid now. I have the honour of being acquainted with a
Call upon her, by all means."
mixed with, but here she is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely
of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought
me leave to assure you that you will find her a very agreeable young
houses; you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,
They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and a

for Hartfield; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction
for it. But on seeing them together, she became perfectly satisfied. It
farther was resolved on, confessed his wish to be made acquainted with
shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general, which must
the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horses
interested. Its character as a ball-room caught him; and instead of
that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be tempted
habits of the Churchills. He seemed to have all the life and spirit,
recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him if he had
there was no getting away, no pause; and, to my utter astonishment, I
pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.-A most
Where features were indifferent, a fine complexion gave beauty to them
"Did you see her often at Weymouth? Were you often in the same
they sell gloves."
you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_
of acquaintance. Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.-I
well. I met her frequently at Weymouth. I had known the Campbells a
"You get upon delicate subjects, Emma," said Mrs. Weston smiling;
When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again, "Did
considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.-I am
"Proof indeed!" said Emma, highly amused.-"Mr. Dixon is very musical,
than eye-a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings.

"As to that-I do not-"
all be behind the scenes. I can only say that there was smoothness
take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always
agreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take the trouble of
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. He
must be ample room in it for every real comfort. The man must be a
be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no

accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even
whims."
left to himself; and though there was no being attached to the aunt, he

of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were
let it pass.
unpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin, in
Hartfield. Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared
from herself; she had little hope of Mr. Knightley, none of Mr. Weston.
there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her,
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at
earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from
would be too late, and the party too numerous. He was soon pretty well
body to. However, as they are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine

written to Mrs. Cole."
there, you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you
will be breaking up the party."
in the room. You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I
rather than run the risk of hurting Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you would stay a
that would entirely destroy my comfort. You must promise me not to sit

He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with a very
depends upon the character of those who handle it. Mr. Knightley, he is
how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air;
Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she left
She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and was pleased to

always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. _Now_
the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love, the strongest of
evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already, at
had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte-a very elegant looking
Colonel Campbell.
subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
slap, to be sure! and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr. Cole, I
obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can; and that

"Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before."

must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be;
you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance."
Campbells to Ireland. Here, she must be leading a life of privation and
"And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. Mr. Dixon's
seems to be a new idea to you.-If I had been there, I think I should
discoveries."
little more, and this tells me quite enough. Depend upon it, we shall
Dixon is a principal in the business."
There was no occasion to press the matter farther. The conviction
ladies, in their different divisions, arrived. Emma watched the entree
did look and move superior; but Emma suspected she might have been glad
subject was almost immediately introduced, and she saw the blush of
fair heroine's countenance.
afterwards, heard what each thought of the other. "He had never seen so
father, Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left very busy over
none very near; and that even when days were fixed, and invitations
did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded
good behaviour to his father.



you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just like

would be at her service before it took us home; for I thought it would
suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself, and that it
together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that

has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley really wished

match-making. You do it very ill. Jane Fairfax mistress of the
his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely fond of
"Well," said Mrs. Weston, laughing, "perhaps the greatest good he could
last a great while-and, indeed, she must thankfully say that their
Jane Fairfax! The interest he takes in her-his anxiety about her

her so."

suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very proper compliance.
that he knew nothing of the matter, and had no voice at all, roundly
Emma's mind; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of
marry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.
"I often feel concern," said she, "that I dare not make our carriage
"This present from the Campbells," said she-"this pianoforte is very
had no concern in giving the instrument. But whether he were entirely
And Frank Churchill was heard to say, "I think you could manage this
her."
irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill, coming up with most becoming
else, and he was still talking to Mrs. Cole.
mother's account. After some attempts, therefore, to be permitted to


The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; and

but Jane Fairfax's is much beyond it."
"Are you sure? I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had any
nothing of any consequence."
to dinner."

her present state, would be dangerous.
with his tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her
Highbury;-to Hartfield of course. They were stopping, however, in the
myself. I did not know that I had fixed a day, but as he says I did, I


there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent. Quite
and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,-trying, with all
home any day. But I shall want the ribbon directly-so it had better go

not at all like to have it sent to Mrs. Goddard's."

opinion of the instrument will be worth having.'-But, said I, I shall
thing, then another, there is no saying what, you know. At one time
eats nothing-makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite
excellent apple-dumpling. Well, Mrs. Weston, you have prevailed, I

say that, much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected,
compliment. Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs. Wallis
morning, and Jane was eating these apples, and we talked about them and
already; and Jane said the same. And when he was gone, she almost
afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of
sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder. And so Patty told me,
"Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. Pray take


it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. You see
emotion; she must reason herself into the power of performance; and
"Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ," said Frank Churchill, with a

coming to hand. Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to
all conjecture."


"Here is something quite new to me. Do you know it?-Cramer.-And here
remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of


thank him. I will not open the window here; it would give you all cold;
"How d' ye do?-how d'ye do?-Very well, I thank you. So obliged to you


pianoforte. Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in."
"Oh! do come in. They will be so very happy to see you."
"Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss
shocked!-Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!"
the room,) I have not been able to succeed. Mr. Knightley cannot stop.

CHAPTER XI
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again;
the wicked aids of vanity-to assist him first in pacing out the room
most willingly undertook to play as long as they could wish to dance;
couple there will be plenty of room."
stand up. Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it.
five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation

quite the thing!"
"We were too magnificent," said he. "We allowed unnecessary room. Ten

that-I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very

of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
feel. Oh! you were perfectly right! Ten couple, in either of the

no-a very bad plan. They would catch worse colds at the Crown than
if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. Mr. Perry is
opening the windows at Randalls. Nobody could be so imprudent! I never
live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. However,
thing over. There is no hurry at all. If it can be contrived to be at
under Mrs. Weston's care. Mrs. Weston undertakes to direct the whole."
have been very bad, but for Perry's great attention. He came four times
desired to say so from both. It would be the greatest pleasure to them,

The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, "Men never know
their four selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
suggestion. A private dance, without sitting down to supper, was
"You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. It is a
upon them? Or Miss Bates? She is still nearer.-And I do not know
will not even listen to your questions. I see no advantage in
once. She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know a
"Oh! I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immediately recollect.
chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made themselves; or were left
minute, warm and incessant, could not but please; and for another

their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third week were
indifference about it. Either because he did not dance himself, or
must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I
ball, for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree.
was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his
herself, she had not mentioned it; but now she was too ill to trifle,
Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friends there whom

sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes; and when rousing
thoughts and cares!-and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring-but

precious and more delightful than the day before!-every day making me
He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma
Bates? How unlucky! Miss Bates's powerful, argumentative mind might
He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.
"You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit,
to Hartfield. My regard for Hartfield is most warm"-
was doubtful, said, "It was time to go;" and the young man, though he
A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest "Good-bye," closed
seeing him which every morning had brought, the assurance of his

Mr. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness. He could not
regret in this woeful change; but when they did meet, her composure was
CHAPTER XIII
coming to Randalls again this spring. But, on the other hand, she could
was to mark their parting; but still they were to part. When she became
not persuade myself to feel more than I do. I am quite enough in love.
can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. No, if he had believed
very well again after a little while-and then, it will be a good thing
describing every thing exterior and local that could be supposed
in the very last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it was by
imagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again.
idea of Harriet's succeeding her in his affections. Was it
will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested
them again; Mr. Elton and his bride. There was hardly time to talk over

avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and restless about the

tranquillity. These are the motives which I have been pressing on you.
of grief was comforted away, still remained powerful enough to prompt

breathing. Oh! the coldness of a Jane Fairfax!-Harriet is worth a
Mrs. Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be

beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being "elegantly dressed, and very
As for Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear-but no, she would not
little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy as
"Oh! yes-very-a very pleasing young woman."

Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. He is just as
and her father's being present to engage Mr. Elton, she had a quarter
Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise or refined herself,
the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or
delightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial
for Mrs. Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.

know. Surry is the garden of England."

preferable. When people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you
home than engage in schemes of pleasure."
think, on the contrary, when people shut themselves up entirely from
benefit; and Mr. Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown to you,
understood. It would be a charming introduction for you, who have lived
_introduction_-of her going into public under the auspices of a friend

_mediocre_ to the last degree. You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that _the_
'But,' said I, 'to be quite honest, I do not think I can live without
find myself in such a circle. I hope we shall have many sweet little
surely?"
half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper."


Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some old acquaintance-and
Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man."
resources, and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery.
person to be thought of! How I catch myself out! Frank Churchill comes
quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. But I believe I




so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superior
judging, following the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or taking it for
little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew
him, had in all likelihood been given also. She was, of course, the
solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting to assist and
is absolutely charming! You will laugh at my warmth-but, upon my word,

with the Campbells are so palpably at an end! And I think she feels it.
Miss Fairfax's acquaintance here, any of those who have known her
than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. I have no idea of that sort of
extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her
have done wrong with regard to Mr. Dixon, but this is a punishment
friend of Mrs. Elton, nor, under Mrs. Elton's guidance, the very active
tolerate Mrs. Elton as she seemed to do. She heard of her walking with
always loved her with such real, generous affection."

apology for Jane.
Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have chosen
have imagined any thing but inviting."
minutes silence, he said,
sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs. Elton by her superiority both of mind

leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or
say, would not have me if I were to ask her-and I am very sure I shall



civilities and consents to be with her. Mrs. Weston, your argument
exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau."


"I see how it is," said she. "I see what a life I am to lead among you.
the poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at
course-and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must
give up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the
like me now. I have neglected her too long. But I will shew her greater
put off, but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening
immaterial. She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to
chief of even Emma's vexation.
walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginning to rain. It
walk before breakfast does me good."
Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before.



opinion on the subject had I formed one. It raises my influence much
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they might

been wanting us to visit them these several years! But I only go for
affection for the person who was to be his wife; but that he had not
former with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civility
nearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration of
Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of
a grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believed herself
Betty by the coach, and I hope I can afford _that_. We three shall be
"I have a notion," said Sir John, "that Miss Marianne would not object
them to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talk
me such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of,
opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother's
Jennings' manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlook
herself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of
so improved when you come back again! I have a little plan of

let me hear a word about the expense of it."

likewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be left
especially in being together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest of
information with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindness
less reluctance than she had expected to feel. With regard to herself,
unwillingness to quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness;

disposition, and so many had been her objections against such a measure
short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intentions were;
of a different nature-she must then learn to avoid every selfish
addressed to her sister. To atone for this conduct therefore, Elinor
from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
arrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to her
engaged. This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave her
which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister, and this
felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach, and Marianne,
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and she immediately
"Is your sister ill?" said he.


little, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I have been
"Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at their house? How does
will do between you about her. Ay, it is a fine thing to be young and
Marianne was obliged to appear again.
their breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and
he said when he heard of your coming with Mama? I forget what it was
first was induced to go likewise.
could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs.
"Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?" said she to
"How odd, indeed!" repeated Elinor within herself, regarding her sister
many days longer as unpleasant as they now were, she would represent in
disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure to

"That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to the
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. In another day

a frost.
even in my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem
Jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with her

About a week after their arrival, it became certain that Willoughby was
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those of

silent.
nothing to tell."
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read it
than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.
known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine
was enough-_he_ was not there-and she sat down, equally ill-disposed to

well; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, you
write the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fears
window to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.
satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
to congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother? Elinor was not
inquiry has been impertinent; but I had not supposed any secrecy
support its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,

time wished to shield her conduct from censure, she thought it most
may endeavour to deserve her,"-took leave, and went away.

equally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared, without one
stairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to another

instantly, had not her sister caught hold of her.
was beyond her wish. She sat in an agony of impatience which affected
feelings of her sister were instantly expressed. Her face was crimsoned

He made no reply; his complexion changed and all his embarrassment
to screen her from the observation of others, while reviving her with
not the place for explanations. Wait only till tomorrow."
evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm. She instantly begged
luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room, where
misapprehension of any kind. Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment
As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already

a continual flow of tears would permit her. In this situation, Elinor,
longer than while she spoke, and was immediately followed by a return
irritability, not to speak to her for the world. In such circumstances,
engage Mrs. Jennings's notice entirely to herself.
made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Jennings's notice. That good
enough; but as for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature. I
imply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no such
away to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw Marianne
that such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must have its
    beg to return my sincere acknowledgments. I am much concerned to
    a belief of more than I felt, or meant to express, I shall reproach

separation for ever, she was not aware that such language could be
She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then read
depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on the
contributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse
felt in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervous
This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,

"Forgive me, forgive me," throwing her arms round her sister's neck; "I
"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."
chose to put an end to it. Every additional day of unhappy confidence,
"But he told you that he loved you."

you will feel something more than surprise, when you know that I am in
Her second note, which had been written on the morning after the dance
there was a dance. I have been told that you were asked to be of the
The contents of her last note to him were these:-
have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely deceived, in something
sentiments are no longer what they were, you will return my notes, and
impropriety of their having been written at all; and she was silently
"I can believe it," said Elinor; "but unfortunately he did not feel the
together at Barton? The morning that we parted too! When he told me
instigated?"
Elinor would not contend, and only replied, "Whoever may have been so
mortification-but I cannot. I must feel-I must be wretched-and they are
without knowing that she received warmth from one, or discerning
clearing myself? 'The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)
attractive among his female acquaintance?-Oh! no one, no one-he talked
"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for Willoughby's sake-and now
such a woman as Lady Middleton! Oh, what would _he_ say to that!"


that if this be true, he has used a young lady of my acquaintance
will amuse her."
said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,

amused by the relation of all the news of the day. Had not Elinor, in
grieves me to see her! And I declare if she is not gone away without
"Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see her? a smart, stylish
turn off his servants, and make a thorough reform at once? I warrant
Miss Walker hinted to her, that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would
seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well, by-and-by we shall have a
down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has been hanging

it talked of; and as for your sister, I am sure I would not mention a
the sake of every one concerned in it, make it unfit to become the
Marianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
forgot her; but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and then
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the carriages
with or without Colonel Brandon." And then rising, she went away to
refused to do. Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,
tasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sister. My poor

he neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he

"That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think-in short, that a man,
were waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the other
his seat in Somersetshire. My astonishment!-but it would be impossible
moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself, "And
"Ah!" said Colonel Brandon, "there is, indeed! But your sister does
Dashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel

unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at others, lost every
"No, no, no, it cannot be," she cried; "she cannot feel. Her kindness
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid. She expected
from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she entered their room,
of his letter. The work of one moment was destroyed by the next. The
object, that after many expressions of pity, she withdrew, still
All her impatience to be at home again now returned; her mother was
and positively refusing Elinor's offered attendance, went out alone for

"It is Colonel Brandon!" said she, with vexation. "We are never safe
injustice and error; for Colonel Brandon _did_ come in; and Elinor, who
wish in desiring it-I hope, I believe it is-is to be a means of giving
Willoughby, that will open his character farther. Your telling it will
be a short one. On such a subject," sighing heavily, "can I have little
measure, your sister Marianne."
were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we were playfellows
was at once her uncle and guardian. My brother did not deserve her; he
had depended on her fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe
with such a husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to

not trace her beyond her first seducer, and there was every reason to
visit him in a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt; and
a better preparation for death; and that was given. I saw her placed in
I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation. Their fates,
It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would I have
removed her from school, to place her under the care of a very
clue, though she certainly knew all. He, her father, a well-meaning,
"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "could it be-could Willoughby!"-
he had made poor and miserable; but _had_ he known it, what would it

success; and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might yet
from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the contrary, every

left him at Barton?"
was within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, he to

and esteem for him.
not entirely such as the former had hoped to see. Not that Marianne
irritated than before, she did not see her less wretched. Her mind did

humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which _she_ could wish
though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at
friends. Design could never bring them in each other's way: negligence
it right that they should sometimes see their brother.

it herself, reaped all its advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor
He would not speak another word to him, meet him where he might, for
was a great deal too far off to visit; she hated him so much that she
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a
by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the
confidence. His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
was married. She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married; and Elinor now
Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence always gave her pain,
have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and
exultation; "we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau to
are sure I have made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
you will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."




CHAPTER XXXIII.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollected that there was
quickest succession; one gentleman only was standing there, and it is
Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of strong, natural,

of concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her side.
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days.
understand she is a woman of very good fortune. And the Middletons too,
related to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve to
Jennings's servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited for
Mrs. Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not stand
to Conduit Street, and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton.
establishment in life."
enthusiastic generosity, he added, "Elinor, I wish with all my heart it
attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix
himself, however, he added, "That is, I mean to say-your friends are
same time. And yet it is not very unlikely."
connection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its taking place in

respect, so immediately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my
that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's
consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large purchases of
laid of Fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of the

living, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an acquaintance
"But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income. Few
this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim on her future
the matter with Marianne?-she looks very unwell, has lost her colour,
particularly. I remember Fanny used to say that she would marry sooner
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home, and Sir John
woman! Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. And Mrs.

her notice; and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of the most
and to _her_ she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking
expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believed
Edward assured them himself of his being in town, within a very short
for three months. Their sisters and Mrs. Jennings were invited
company with Mrs. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, was
Sir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and it
their characters and her own difficulties, and to have an opportunity
These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, and
to this formidable mother-in-law.
possibility of its being Miss Morton's mother, rather than her own,
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it
the Miss Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humble
four.
loss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this poverty
was all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a right
were equally earnest in support of their own descendant.
necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when

not aware of their being Elinor's work, particularly requested to look
enough,-for, colouring a little, she immediately said,
"Beautifully indeed! But _she_ does every thing well."

she had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as they
chair, and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to hers,
very intelligent "Ah! poor dear," immediately gave her her salts; and
"Poor Marianne!" said her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,

retarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he been otherwise
civility of Mrs. Ferrars;-that her interest and her vanity should so
The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mrs. Palmer soon
with it?"
on.
difficulties at all, to what I used to think. Mrs. Ferrars is a
"I never was in better health."
"Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next to

dislike, I know it is most violent."
form, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallen
easy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort still
to sit down; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies in
but never did.
other of her feelings, strong in itself, and strongly spoken. She met
looking with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy, nor

to whatever cause best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied, and
private.
mind to keep them, little as well as great."
pain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being selfish,




to all those intimate connections who knew it before.
morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children, she could not
despise her for offering. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the
the latter. An effort even yet lighter might have made her their
friends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid old
every one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing his
apparently likely to produce evil to her. But while the imaginations of
musical party at her house. The consequence of which was, that Mrs.

toilet, which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes of
considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all; for after
her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay on their part
As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, she made no

the modesty and worth of the other. Why they _were_ different, Robert
"Upon my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more; and so I often

near Dawlish. He bestowed his hearty approbation however on their
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's. I was to decide
and where can the supper be?' _I_ immediately saw that there could be

while Mrs. Jennings's engagements kept her from home. The expense would
they are Lady Middleton's visitors. How can I ask them away from her?"
But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a
of inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slyly
herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views! Such an
its arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some share in the
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that reached Elinor

that period to her own home, and her own habits, in which she found the
"Lord! my dear Miss Dashwood! have you heard the news?"
and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street, so he
believe there is no great reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will
Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my
conjurer, popt it all out. 'Lord!' thinks she to herself, 'they are all
country. So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place, for
would send for Mr. Donavan, and Mr. Donavan found the house in all this
deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that he is gone back
allow him five hundred a-year, she would make as good an appearance
in it; that Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be the
Lucy. What Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be a
without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any

all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure
Edward for her. She would not even admit it to have been natural; and



my trust, I never could have convinced you."
it as much as possible without spreading it farther. I acquit Edward of
sex; and time and habit will teach him to forget that he ever thought
being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that it
could make me less desire the connection. Nothing has proved him
exertion; they did not spring up of themselves; they did not occur to
have borne with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
dislike to her; and even to see Edward himself, if chance should bring
talked of Edward's affection, it cost her only a spasm in her
our roof yesterday."
equal to any thing. She has borne it all, with the fortitude of an
rewarded! 'I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in her
prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in _that_ quarter. '_There_,
on him the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, brings in a good
Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped her hands
"All this, however," he continued, "was urged in vain. Edward said very
better kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and Elinor's heart wrung

all feel for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of our



as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in
Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's conduct, but only
warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward's
exerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing but the
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people are
often. At least, you should not _remind_ your Mother of inviting him."
Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth having thanked her for
and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose

I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be
sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn, had by some accident been
I enquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
     been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my
     not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so
     deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in his case than
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name,
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.
to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced,
wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch-street, and




where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
"We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs.
we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains,

smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.
she found herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that her
fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect
article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to
beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction,
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is


haste, and come down this moment."

when Miss De Bourgh comes in."
looked that way.


"from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which

doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
thought she could witness without trepidation.

make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered
being so thin, and so small. There was neither in figure nor face, any
beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
mother's maiden name?--Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her
"A little."
your's.--Do you draw?"


idle, certainly might."
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
younger sisters must be very young?"


party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was

for Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But

and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate
the first. Their other engagements were few; as the style of living of

by Lady Catherine; who talked of his coming with the greatest
respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the


such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned


tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired,

"You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
are not your own."
and such things may come out, as will shock your relations to hear."
only four dances! I am sorry to pain you--but so it was. He danced only

him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble."
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take the
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss

Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely

very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is

Collins first came to Hunsford."
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest
journey. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance."
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
the present distance."
"Are you pleased with Kent?"
gone. "My dear Eliza he must be in love with you, or he would never have
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
she believed he might have the best informed mind.
her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
should bring him where no one else was brought; and to prevent its ever
being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr.
She was engaged one day as she walked, in re-perusing Jane's last
you going much farther?"
arranges the business just as he pleases."
dependence."
where they like."
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, "And pray, what is
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps his sister does as well
may like to have her own way."
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them."
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to
"You may depend upon my not mentioning it."
"Did Mr. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference?"
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
his friend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to
Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and,
arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him,
business in London.
Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much

noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an enquiry after her

recommend his suit.
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
"I might as well enquire," replied she, "why with so evident a design of
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
kind."
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
have been great indeed."
"And this," cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
reflection, by every thing. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on.
"You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was
and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his

sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of
     "Be not alarmed, Madam, on receiving this letter, by the
     demand it of your justice.
     had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who
     necessity must be obeyed--and farther apology would be absurd.--I
     of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I
     the latter probable.--If it be so, if I have been misled by such
     conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.--My objections to
     total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed
     confirmed, and every inducement heightened, which could have led me
     my friend, the certain evils of such a choice.--I described, and
     returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given,
     concealment, this disguise, was beneath me.--It is done, however,
     witness of undoubted veracity. Mr. Wickham is the son of a very
     engaging; he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the
     suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his
     resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it
     ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three
     exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study,
     appearance of acquaintance was dropt. How he lived I know not. But
     and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there
     intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea
     This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we
     For the truth of every thing here related, I can appeal more

contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was
But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life,
such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before
near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
Darcy's character, though he had assured her that respect for the
incautiously shewn. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of

concerned. Till this moment, I never knew myself."
deny the justice of his description of Jane.--She felt that Jane's
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind

called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes to take
CHAPTER XIV.
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
you, I feel it exceedingly," said Lady Catherine; "I believe nobody

Elizabeth, "but it is not in my power to accept it.--I must be in town
"Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can.--Daughters

with her.--Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady
horses?--Oh! Bromley, of course.--If you mention my name at the Bell,
recollections.
feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame,
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.
When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them

manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
solemnity replied,
what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will

charms.
he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
"Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes silence, "it seems but

It was not without an effort meanwhile that she could wait even for

to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
"And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia; "but you must lend us the
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
have!"

is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe."
three straws about her. Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
She is almost three and twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia,


loud, that any body might have heard us ten miles off!"
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton
CHAPTER XVII.
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
"Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for him; but he has
"But you _will_ know it, when I have told you what happened the very
seek to clear one, without involving the other.

growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion

"Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
undeserved."

may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present I will
to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,

tranquillity.

she made no answer.

often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. "How can you be smiling so,
"I am sure I shall break _mine_," said Lydia.
added Kitty.
regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate
considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrouled! Oh! my dear father, can you
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three very silly

united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and

finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three
"Nearly three weeks."
"Indeed!" cried Wickham with a look which did not escape her. "And pray
rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her, has always operated, I
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and in the clamorous
Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of

place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been
mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in

to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
the following Christmas, she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
Dovedale, or the Peak.
and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me."

nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
must own that she was tired of great houses; after going over so many,
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and
alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of





The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehensions of
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from
splendor, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.

over the mantle-piece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
"is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
"Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?"
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
"Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
"Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?"
good enough for him."

meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
as affable to the poor."
"He is the best landlord, and the best master," said she, "that ever
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend."
room, when last at Pemberley.
The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise

They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
minutes in which they continued together, were some of the most

discrimination, for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that

what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of every thing,
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in
the country." He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that

satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
into the carriage, and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking
_I_ have seen nothing of it."

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said
character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an

to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
a quarter, than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
of enquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt, as made every thing worse.
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before
feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to
as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But, though
something of real regret, that it "was a very long time since he had had

very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last
Rosings.
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment, than
left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some
interest, but nothing to justify enquiry.
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
son of his patron, were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well known
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been
esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it


all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
